The entry of open source tools in the life sciences arena has proven to be a boon. Open source tools can be used in the predictive and diagnostic fields to provide better medical treatment. Through their use in brain mapping and DNA studies, open source tools can even be used to combat crime.

Nowadays, the applications of information and communications technology (ICT) are not limited to data transmission, cloud deployments, social media, Web servers and mobile applications. Since the last decade, IT is touching every area of the social and corporate world including health and medical sciences. Most of the medical diagnosis laboratories are now equipped with advanced computerised machines to accurately diagnose and fetch the parameters of the human body. These diagnostic machines include those used for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), electroencephalography (EEG), etc. These systems provide a higher degree of accuracy in the analysis of the human body, assisting doctors in diagnosing the disease and thus recommending a suitable course of treatment.

In addition to diagnostic machines, software tools and libraries are also used. These software tools and applications evaluate the biological data collected from the computerised diagnostic machines. Thus, the concept of bioinformatics has evolved, which uses software tools and applications to understand the biological and medical data. These software suites make use of high performance programming languages at the back-end to process and evaluate the biological data set, leading to effective treatment.

Bioinformatics is the interdisciplinary area that integrates biology, computer science, mathematics, engineering, chemistry and statistics for advanced predictions and analytics. The field of molecular biology is also closely associated with bioinformatics for accurate analysis of biological structures. Molecular biology deals with the deep analysis of the bimolecular movements in the cells of the body along with the details of proteins, DNA, RNA and biosynthesis.

Data sets for research in medicine and biology

With the deployment of computerised machines, researchers in diagnostic and medical sciences are taking assistance from software professionals in their field so that the programming modules can be processed by these developers. Even computer scientists are now taking the interdisciplinary field of bioinformatics for their research so that their programming knowledge can be utilised for the health sciences.

There are numerous medical data sets available for research, which are released by the diagnostic laboratories so that the overall architecture and structure of medico-biological data can be analysed by software experts. The programmers working in bioinformatics can download these medical data sets and they can perform the analysis using effective algorithms.

The software tools that can be used for the analysis and evaluation of medical data for specific types of data sets are summarised below.


Figure 1: Elements of bioinformatics
OpenEEG (http://openeeg.sourceforge.net/doc/)

OpenEEG is free and open source software that can be used for EEG signal analysis with numerous libraries as add-ons, including Neuroserver, BioEra, BrainBay, Brainathlon, BrainWave Viewer and EEGMIR.

EEGNET (https://sites.google.com/site/eegnetworks/)

This is a free and open source tool for the analysis and visualisation of EEG brain signals. It has features to visualise the brain network.

BioSig (http://biosig.sourceforge.net/)

BioSig is a software library under free and open source distribution with many features of biomedical signal processing. This library has excellent features to process biosignals including electrocorticogram (ECoG), electromyogram (EMG), electrocardiogram (ECG), electrooculogram (EOG), electroencephalogram (EEG), respiration and many others. In addition, the interfacing toolboxes and drivers for Octave, MATLAB, Python, PHP, Perl, Ruby, Tcl, C and C++ are also available. The key areas of brain-computer interfaces, psychology, neuroinformatics, cardiovascular systems, neurophysiology and sleep research are effectively processed in BioSig.

GenomeTools (http://genometools.org/)

GenomeTools is open source software for the analysis of genome and biological parameters. It has a free library of tools for bioinformatics. The APIs in C are available with detailed manuals. In addition, the deep analysis of biological structures is integrated in GenomeTools.

Working with BioPython for molecular biology (http://biopython.org/)

BioPython provides the set of tools and libraries for the analysis and computation of biological structures. It is available for free and open source distribution and is promoted by the Open Bioinformatics Foundation (OBF). It can parse the files of bioinformatics into the data structures that can be processed by Python code.

The following international formats are supported in BioPython:

UniGene
PubMed
GenBank
Medline
GenBank
FASTA
Clustalw
Blast
Use the following command to install BioPython in Ubuntu:

<span style="color: #000000;">$ sudo apt-get install python-biopython</span>
The following command will install the documentation along with BioPython:

<span style="color: #000000;">$ sudo apt-get install python-biopython-doc</span>
BioSQL (http://biosql.org) can be used with BioPython to store a biological database. To integrate BioSQL, the following instruction is executed:

<span style="color: #000000;">$ sudo apt-get install python-biopython-sql</span>
Sequence is the key object in bioinformatics. Sequences can be processed in BioPython with the following instructions:

<span style="color: #000000;">&gt;&gt;&gt; from Bio.Seq import Seq
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_seq = Seq(“MyDefinedSequence”)
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_seq
 
Seq(‘ MyDefinedSequence ‘, Alphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; print(my_seq)
 
MyDefinedSequence
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_seq.alphabet
 
Alphabet()</span>

Figure 2: BioPython library for molecular biology
Complement and reverse complement

These are very simple — the methods return a new Seq object with the appropriate sequence and the same alphabet, as shown below:

<span style="color: #000000;">&gt;&gt;&gt; from Bio.Seq import Seq
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; from Bio.Alphabet import generic_dna
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna = Seq(“MY_VALUES_DNA”, generic_dna)
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna
 
Seq(‘MY_VALUES_DNA’, DNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna.complement()
 
Seq(‘ATCATGTGACCA’, DNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna.reverse_complement()
 
Seq(‘ACCAGTGTACTA’, DNAAlphabet())</span>
Transcription functions on DNA and RNA

If you have a DNA sequence, you may want to turn it into RNA. In bioinformatics we normally assume the DNA is the coding strand (not the template strand); so this is a simple matter of replacing all the thymines with uracil:

<span style="color: #000000;">&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna
 
Seq(‘MY_VALUES_DNA’, DNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_dna.transcribe()
 
Seq(‘AGUACACUGGU’, RNAAlphabet())</span>
With the specification of RNA, the associated DNA can be fetched:

<span style="color: #000000;">&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_rna = my_values_dna.transcribe()
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_rna
 
Seq(‘AGUACACUGGU’, RNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_rna.back_transcribe()
 
Seq(‘MY_VALUES_DNA’, DNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_rna
 
Seq(‘AGUACACUGGU’, RNAAlphabet())
 
&gt;&gt;&gt; my_values_rna.back_transcribe().reverse_complement()
 
Seq(‘ACCAGTGTACT’, DNAAlphabet())</span>
Sleep EEG analysis in GNU Octave

Assorted signals are delivered to all parts of the body so that the other organs can communicate with each other for specific or general purposes. One of the key signals in the human brain is electroencephalography (EEG), which is generated from the brain, even when asleep or unconscious. Electroencephalography (EEG) signals comprise brain waves that can be evaluated using GNU Octave. The analysis on sleeping disorders and various diseases can be done with EEG evaluation.

GNU Octave (https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/) is one of the powerful and multi-functional tools used for engineering and scientific applications of research. The simulations related to engineering as well as medicine can be implemented with the assorted tool boxes and functions in Octave. It is used as an effective alternate to MATLAB since it is open source and can be freely distributed. A number of tool boxes for different applications are available in GNU Octave, which can be used for optimisation and predictive analysis.


Figure 3: Viewing EEG signals in the WFDB tool box
The Wave Form Database (WFDB) package can be integrated with GNU Octave. This package is equipped with the functions and modules for EEG and brain signal evaluations. A similar process is followed in case of brain mapping or brain fingerprinting for criminal investigation when the subject is in an unconscious state. There are assorted stages of sleep or unconscious states which can be analysed from EEG signals after recording from the electrodes. This process assists in the forensic analysis of the person while in the unconscious state. By this evaluation, the medical disorders can also be detected using the WFDB package in Octave. The following are the excerpts of Benchmark Sleep Stages which can be evaluated using the WFDB package in GNU Octave so that the overall state of the nervous system can be evaluated and predictions made, along with diagnosing brain disorders.

Stage 1: Tiredness, drowsiness, the pre-sleep stage and lethargy

Eye activities
Rolling eye movements
Sharp transients
Stage 2: Normal night sleep

Sleep spindles
Slow eye movement
Stage 3: Delta sleep or slow wave sleep

Sleep time of 6.5 hours
With the following instruction, the demonstration of the WFDB tool box can be viewed in Octave.

<span style="color: #000000;">&gt;&gt; wfdbdemo</span>
The following instructions can be executed to read and plot the ECG signal from the data set repository of PhysioBank:

<span style="color: #000000;">[time,signal]=rdsamp(‘mitdb/100’,1);
 
plot(time,signal);</span>
(Source: https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/matlab/wfdb-app-matlab/)

Using similar methodology, the waveform of arterial blood pressure (ABP) can be analysed using the wabp function.

Scope of research in biomedical engineering
Nowadays, bioinformatics and biomedical predictive analytics are two key domains of research for assorted applications. The extraction, processing and predictive mining from the brain, heart and other human body generated signals are evaluated with the use of information technology. The data sets from Physionet, UCSD, FPMS and others can be used for the research work in bioinformatics with the integration of data mining and machine learning tools.




if you want to doing something didn't need to waiting for the chance , all you need did are doing your best to get that , condition if uncomplete , then,  waiting , if waiting didn't coming ,go create condition ! this are is the way .
something measure by the possibility rule , and use this to to measure what is right and wrong , but is found the new things ,the rule you have to discover by your selve , and even is appropriate rule 


wiki pedia 
fire fox 
 search engine : google chrome rander information for internel 
need connect to the vpn  : vpn : virtual provide network  
need internet ,the 3 way 1.take another object host or hacking 2. detective wifi(wireless field  internet ) surround with you crack it 
3. use your self things 
 

into the information need  into and custom like human and for the purpose to catch you need  , don't asking or banging they won't get you need  go  youself learning about everythings 
remember only friend is "rick..R.block (level3)"




#define react behavior 
def purpose():
 random.element=os.display(music,dancing , random word )
 
 

#define activate value 
def E_f():
 Ef =100 
 

Ethical Hacking - Overview
Hacking has been a part of computing for almost five decades and it is a very broad discipline, which covers a wide range of topics. The first known event of hacking had taken place in 1960 at MIT and at the same time, the term "Hacker" was originated.

Hacking is the act of finding the possible entry points that exist in a computer system or a computer network and finally entering into them. Hacking is usually done to gain unauthorized access to a computer system or a computer network, either to harm the systems or to steal sensitive information available on the computer.

Hacking is usually legal as long as it is being done to find weaknesses in a computer or network system for testing purpose. This sort of hacking is what we call Ethical Hacking.

A computer expert who does the act of hacking is called a "Hacker". Hackers are those who seek knowledge, to understand how systems operate, how they are designed, and then attempt to play with these systems.

Types of Hacking
We can segregate hacking into different categories, based on what is being hacked. Here is a set of examples −

Website Hacking − Hacking a website means taking unauthorized control over a web server and its associated software such as databases and other interfaces.

Network Hacking − Hacking a network means gathering information about a network by using tools like Telnet, NS lookup, Ping, Tracert, Netstat, etc. with the intent to harm the network system and hamper its operation.

Email Hacking − It includes getting unauthorized access on an Email account and using it without taking the consent of its owner.

Ethical Hacking − Ethical hacking involves finding weaknesses in a computer or network system for testing purpose and finally getting them fixed.

Password Hacking − This is the process of recovering secret passwords from data that has been stored in or transmitted by a computer system.

Computer Hacking − This is the process of stealing computer ID and password by applying hacking methods and getting unauthorized access to a computer system.

Advantages of Hacking
Hacking is quite useful in the following scenarios −

To recover lost information, especially in case you lost your password.

To perform penetration testing to strengthen computer and network security.

To put adequate preventative measures in place to prevent security breaches.

To have a computer system that prevents malicious hackers from gaining access.

Disadvantages of Hacking
Hacking is quite dangerous if it is done with harmful intent. It can cause −

Massive security breach.

Unauthorized system access on private information.

Privacy violation.

Hampering system operation.

Denial of service attacks.

Malicious attack on the system.

Purpose of Hacking
There could be various positive and negative intentions behind performing hacking activities. Here is a list of some probable reasons why people indulge in hacking activities −

Just for fun

Show-off

Steal important information

Damaging the system

Hampering privacy

Money extortion

System security testing

To break policy compliance

Ethical Hacking - Hacker Types
Hackers can be classified into different categories such as white hat, black hat, and grey hat, based on their intent of hacking a system. These different terms come from old Spaghetti Westerns, where the bad guy wears a black cowboy hat and the good guy wears a white hat.

White Hat Hackers
White Hat hackers are also known as Ethical Hackers. They never intent to harm a system, rather they try to find out weaknesses in a computer or a network system as a part of penetration testing and vulnerability assessments.

Ethical hacking is not illegal and it is one of the demanding jobs available in the IT industry. There are numerous companies that hire ethical hackers for penetration testing and vulnerability assessments.

Black Hat Hackers
Black Hat hackers, also known as crackers, are those who hack in order to gain unauthorized access to a system and harm its operations or steal sensitive information.

Black Hat hacking is always illegal because of its bad intent which includes stealing corporate data, violating privacy, damaging the system, blocking network communication, etc.

Grey Hat Hackers
Grey hat hackers are a blend of both black hat and white hat hackers. They act without malicious intent but for their fun, they exploit a security weakness in a computer system or network without the owner’s permission or knowledge.

Their intent is to bring the weakness to the attention of the owners and getting appreciation or a little bounty from the owners.

Miscellaneous Hackers
Apart from the above well-known classes of hackers, we have the following categories of hackers based on what they hack and how they do it −

Red Hat Hackers
Red hat hackers are again a blend of both black hat and white hat hackers. They are usually on the level of hacking government agencies, top-secret information hubs, and generally anything that falls under the category of sensitive information.

Blue Hat Hackers
A blue hat hacker is someone outside computer security consulting firms who is used to bug-test a system prior to its launch. They look for loopholes that can be exploited and try to close these gaps. Microsoft also uses the term BlueHat to represent a series of security briefing events.

Elite Hackers
This is a social status among hackers, which is used to describe the most skilled. Newly discovered exploits will circulate among these hackers.

Script Kiddie
A script kiddie is a non-expert who breaks into computer systems by using pre-packaged automated tools written by others, usually with little understanding of the underlying concept, hence the term Kiddie.

Neophyte
A neophyte, "n00b", or "newbie" or "Green Hat Hacker" is someone who is new to hacking or phreaking and has almost no knowledge or experience of the workings of technology and hacking.

Hacktivist
A hacktivist is a hacker who utilizes technology to announce a social, ideological, religious, or political message. In general, most hacktivism involves website defacement or denialof-service attacks.

Ethical Hacking - Famous Hackers
In this chapter, we will have a brief synopsis of some of the famous Hackers and how they became famous.

Jonathan James
Jonathan James
Jonathan James was an American hacker, illfamous as the first juvenile sent to prison for cybercrime in United States. He committed suicide in 2008 of a self-inflicted gunshot wound.

In 1999, at the age of 16, he gained access to several computers by breaking the password of a server that belonged to NASA and stole the source code of the International Space Station among other sensitive information.

Ian Murphy
Ian Murphy
Ian Murphy, also known as Captain Zap, at one point of time was having high school students steal computer equipment for him. Ian selfproclaims to have been "the first hacker ever convicted of a crime".

Ian's career as a master hacker was fabricated in 1986 after he and his unemployed wife decided to form some type of business.

He has a long history of computer and Internet frauds. One of his favourite games is to forge Email headers and to send out third-party threat letters.

Kevin Mitnick
Kevin Mitnick
Kevin Mitnick is a computer security consultant and author, who infiltrates his clients’ companies to expose their security strengths, weaknesses, and potential loopholes.

He is the first hacker to have his face immortalized on an FBI "Most Wanted" poster. He was formerly the most wanted computer criminal in the history of United States.

From the 1970s up until his last arrest in 1995, he skilfully bypassed corporate security safeguards, and found his way into some of the most well-guarded systems such as Sun Microsystems, Digital Equipment Corporation, Motorola, Netcom, and Nokia.

Mark Abene
Mark Abene
Mark Abene, known around the world by his pseudonym Phiber Optik, is an information security expert and entrepreneur. He was a high-profile hacker in the 1980s and early 1990s. He was one of the first hackers to openly debate and defend the positive merits of ethical hacking as a beneficial tool to industry.

His expertise spreads across penetration studies, on-site security assessments, secure code reviews, security policy review and generation, systems and network architecture, systems administration and network management, among many others. His clientele includes American Express, UBS, First USA, Ernst & Young, KPMG and others.

Johan Helsinguis
Johan Helsinguis
Johan Helsingius, better known as Julf, came into the limelight in the 1980s when he started operating the world's most popular anonymous remailer, called penet.fi.

Johan was also responsible for product development for the first Pan-European internet service provider, Eunet International.

He is at present, a member of the board of Technologia Incognita, a hackerspace association in Amsterdam, and supports the communication companies worldwide with his cyber knowledge.

Linus Torvalds
Linus Torvalds
Linus Torvalds is known as one of the best hackers of all time. He rose to fame by creating Linux, the very popular Unix-based operating system. Linux is open source and thousands of developers have contributed to its Kernel. However, Torvalds remains the ultimate authority on what new code is incorporated into the standard Linux kernel. As of 2006, approximately two percent of the Linux kernel was written by Torvalds himself.

He just aspires to be simple and have fun by making the world’s best operating system. Torvalds has received honorary doctorates from Stockholm University and University of Helsinki.

Robert Morris
Robert Morris
Robert Morris, known as the creator of the Morris Worm, the first computer worm to be unleashed on the Internet. The worm had the capability to slow down computers and make them no longer usable. As a result of this, he was sentenced to three years’ probation, 400 hours of community service and also had to pay a penalty amount of $10,500.

Morris is currently working as a tenured professor at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.

Gary McKinnon
Gary McKinnon
Gary McKinnon is a renowned systems administrator and hacker. He was famously accused of the “biggest military computer hack of all time”. He had successfully hacked the networks of Army, Air Force, Navy and NASA systems of the United States government.

In his statements to the media, he has often mentioned that his motivation was only to find evidence of UFOs, antigravity technology, and the suppression of “free energy” that could potentially be useful to the public.

Kevin Poulsen
Kevin Poulsen
Kevin Poulsen, also known as Dark Dante, became famous for his notoriety when he took over all the telephone lines of Los Angeles radio station KIIS-FM, guaranteeing that he would be the 102nd caller and win the prize of a Porsche 944 S2.

Poulsen also drew the ire of FBI, when he hacked into federal computers for wiretap information, for which he had to serve a sentence of five years. He has reinvented himself as a journalist and has carved a niche for himself in this field.

Ethical Hacking - Terminologies
Following is a list of important terms used in the field of hacking.

Adware − Adware is software designed to force pre-chosen ads to display on your system.

Attack − An attack is an action that is done on a system to get its access and extract sensitive data.

Back door − A back door, or trap door, is a hidden entry to a computing device or software that bypasses security measures, such as logins and password protections.

Bot − A bot is a program that automates an action so that it can be done repeatedly at a much higher rate for a more sustained period than a human operator could do it. For example, sending HTTP, FTP or Telnet at a higher rate or calling script to create objects at a higher rate.

Botnet − A botnet, also known as zombie army, is a group of computers controlled without their owners’ knowledge. Botnets are used to send spam or make denial of service attacks.

Brute force attack − A brute force attack is an automated and the simplest kind of method to gain access to a system or website. It tries different combination of usernames and passwords, over and over again, until it gets in.

Buffer Overflow − Buffer Overflow is a flaw that occurs when more data is written to a block of memory, or buffer, than the buffer is allocated to hold.

Clone phishing − Clone phishing is the modification of an existing, legitimate email with a false link to trick the recipient into providing personal information.

Cracker − A cracker is one who modifies the software to access the features which are considered undesirable by the person cracking the software, especially copy protection features.

Denial of service attack (DoS) − A denial of service (DoS) attack is a malicious attempt to make a server or a network resource unavailable to users, usually by temporarily interrupting or suspending the services of a host connected to the Internet.

DDoS − Distributed denial of service attack.

Exploit Kit − An exploit kit is software system designed to run on web servers, with the purpose of identifying software vulnerabilities in client machines communicating with it and exploiting discovered vulnerabilities to upload and execute malicious code on the client.

Exploit − Exploit is a piece of software, a chunk of data, or a sequence of commands that takes advantage of a bug or vulnerability to compromise the security of a computer or network system.

Firewall − A firewall is a filter designed to keep unwanted intruders outside a computer system or network while allowing safe communication between systems and users on the inside of the firewall.

Keystroke logging − Keystroke logging is the process of tracking the keys which are pressed on a computer (and which touchscreen points are used). It is simply the map of a computer/human interface. It is used by gray and black hat hackers to record login IDs and passwords. Keyloggers are usually secreted onto a device using a Trojan delivered by a phishing email.

Logic bomb − A virus secreted into a system that triggers a malicious action when certain conditions are met. The most common version is the time bomb.

Malware − Malware is an umbrella term used to refer to a variety of forms of hostile or intrusive software, including computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware, spyware, adware, scareware, and other malicious programs.

Master Program − A master program is the program a black hat hacker uses to remotely transmit commands to infected zombie drones, normally to carry out Denial of Service attacks or spam attacks.

Phishing − Phishing is an e-mail fraud method in which the perpetrator sends out legitimate-looking emails, in an attempt to gather personal and financial information from recipients.

Phreaker − Phreakers are considered the original computer hackers and they are those who break into the telephone network illegally, typically to make free longdistance phone calls or to tap phone lines.

Rootkit − Rootkit is a stealthy type of software, typically malicious, designed to hide the existence of certain processes or programs from normal methods of detection and enable continued privileged access to a computer.

Shrink Wrap code − A Shrink Wrap code attack is an act of exploiting holes in unpatched or poorly configured software.

Social engineering − Social engineering implies deceiving someone with the purpose of acquiring sensitive and personal information, like credit card details or user names and passwords.

Spam − A Spam is simply an unsolicited email, also known as junk email, sent to a large number of recipients without their consent.

Spoofing − Spoofing is a technique used to gain unauthorized access to computers, whereby the intruder sends messages to a computer with an IP address indicating that the message is coming from a trusted host.

Spyware − Spyware is software that aims to gather information about a person or organization without their knowledge and that may send such information to another entity without the consumer's consent, or that asserts control over a computer without the consumer's knowledge.

SQL Injection − SQL injection is an SQL code injection technique, used to attack data-driven applications, in which malicious SQL statements are inserted into an entry field for execution (e.g. to dump the database contents to the attacker).

Threat − A threat is a possible danger that can exploit an existing bug or vulnerability to compromise the security of a computer or network system.

Trojan − A Trojan, or Trojan Horse, is a malicious program disguised to look like a valid program, making it difficult to distinguish from programs that are supposed to be there designed with an intention to destroy files, alter information, steal passwords or other information.

Virus − A virus is a malicious program or a piece of code which is capable of copying itself and typically has a detrimental effect, such as corrupting the system or destroying data.

Vulnerability − A vulnerability is a weakness which allows a hacker to compromise the security of a computer or network system.

Worms − A worm is a self-replicating virus that does not alter files but resides in active memory and duplicates itself.

Cross-site Scripting − Cross-site scripting (XSS) is a type of computer security vulnerability typically found in web applications. XSS enables attackers to inject client-side script into web pages viewed by other users.

Zombie Drone − A Zombie Drone is defined as a hi-jacked computer that is being used anonymously as a soldier or 'drone' for malicious activity, for example, distributing unwanted spam e-mails.

Ethical Hacking - Tools
In this chapter, we will discuss in brief some of famous tools that are widely used to prevent hacking and getting unauthorized access to a computer or network system.

NMAP
Nmap stands for Network Mapper. It is an open source tool that is used widely for network discovery and security auditing. Nmap was originally designed to scan large networks, but it can work equally well for single hosts. Network administrators also find it useful for tasks such as network inventory, managing service upgrade schedules, and monitoring host or service uptime.

Nmap uses raw IP packets to determine −

what hosts are available on the network,

what services those hosts are offering,

what operating systems they are running on,

what type of firewalls are in use, and other such characteristics.

Nmap runs on all major computer operating systems such as Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux.

Metasploit
Metasploit is one of the most powerful exploit tools. It’s a product of Rapid7 and most of its resources can be found at: www.metasploit.com. It comes in two versions − commercial and free edition. Matasploit can be used with command prompt or with Web UI.

With Metasploit, you can perform the following operations −

Conduct basic penetration tests on small networks

Run spot checks on the exploitability of vulnerabilities

Discover the network or import scan data

Browse exploit modules and run individual exploits on hosts

Burp Suit
Burp Suite is a popular platform that is widely used for performing security testing of web applications. It has various tools that work in collaboration to support the entire testing process, from initial mapping and analysis of an application's attack surface, through to finding and exploiting security vulnerabilities.

Burp is easy to use and provides the administrators full control to combine advanced manual techniques with automation for efficient testing. Burp can be easily configured and it contains features to assist even the most experienced testers with their work.

Angry IP Scanner
Angry IP scanner is a lightweight, cross-platform IP address and port scanner. It can scan IP addresses in any range. It can be freely copied and used anywhere. In order to increase the scanning speed, it uses multithreaded approach, wherein a separate scanning thread is created for each scanned IP address.

Angry IP Scanner simply pings each IP address to check if it’s alive, and then, it resolves its hostname, determines the MAC address, scans ports, etc. The amount of gathered data about each host can be saved to TXT, XML, CSV, or IP-Port list files. With help of plugins, Angry IP Scanner can gather any information about scanned IPs.

Cain & Abel
Cain & Abel is a password recovery tool for Microsoft Operating Systems. It helps in easy recovery of various kinds of passwords by employing any of the following methods −

sniffing the network,

cracking encrypted passwords using Dictionary, Brute-Force and Cryptanalysis attacks,

recording VoIP conversations,

decoding scrambled passwords,

recovering wireless network keys,

revealing password boxes,

uncovering cached passwords and analyzing routing protocols.

Cain & Abel is a useful tool for security consultants, professional penetration testers and everyone else who plans to use it for ethical reasons.

Ettercap
Ettercap stands for Ethernet Capture. It is a network security tool for Man-in-the-Middle attacks. It features sniffing of live connections, content filtering on the fly and many other interesting tricks. Ettercap has inbuilt features for network and host analysis. It supports active and passive dissection of many protocols.

You can run Ettercap on all the popular operating systems such as Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X.

EtherPeek
EtherPeek is a wonderful tool that simplifies network analysis in a multiprotocol heterogeneous network environment. EtherPeek is a small tool (less than 2 MB) that can be easily installed in a matter of few minutes.

EtherPeek proactively sniffs traffic packets on a network. By default, EtherPeek supports protocols such as AppleTalk, IP, IP Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), NetWare, TCP, UDP, NetBEUI, and NBT packets.

SuperScan
SuperScan is a powerful tool for network administrators to scan TCP ports and resolve hostnames. It has a user friendly interface that you can use to −

Perform ping scans and port scans using any IP range.

Scan any port range from a built-in list or any given range.

View responses from connected hosts.

Modify the port list and port descriptions using the built in editor.

Merge port lists to build new ones.

Connect to any discovered open port.

Assign a custom helper application to any port.

QualysGuard
QualysGuard is an integrated suite of tools that can be utilized to simplify security operations and lower the cost of compliance. It delivers critical security intelligence on demand and automates the full spectrum of auditing, compliance and protection for IT systems and web applications.

QualysGuard includes a set of tools that can monitor, detect, and protect your global network.

WebInspect
WebInspect is a web application security assessment tool that helps identify known and unknown vulnerabilities within the Web application layer.

It can also help check that a Web server is configured properly, and attempts common web attacks such as parameter injection, cross-site scripting, directory traversal, and more.

LC4
LC4 was formerly known as L0phtCrack. It is a password auditing and recovery application. It is used to test password strength and sometimes to recover lost Microsoft Windows passwords, by using dictionary, brute-force, and hybrid attacks.

LC4 recovers Windows user account passwords to streamline migration of users to another authentication system or to access accounts whose passwords are lost.

LANguard Network Security Scanner
LANguard Network Scanner monitors a network by scanning connected machines and providing information about each node. You can obtain information about each individual operating system.

It can also detect registry issues and have a report set up in HTML format. For each computer, you can list the netbios name table, current logged-on user, and Mac address.

Network Stumbler
Network stumbler is a WiFi scanner and monitoring tool for Windows. It allows network professionals to detect WLANs. It is widely used by networking enthusiasts and hackers because it helps you find non-broadcasting wireless networks.

Network Stumbler can be used to verify if a network is well configured, its signal strength or coverage, and detect interference between one or more wireless networks. It can also be used to non-authorized connections.

ToneLoc
ToneLoc stands for Tone Locator. It was a popular war dialling computer program written for MS-DOS in the early 90’s. War dialling is a technique of using a modem to automatically scan a list of telephone numbers, usually dialling every number in a local area code.

Malicious hackers use the resulting lists in breaching computer security - for guessing user accounts, or locating modems that might provide an entry-point into computer or other electronic systems.

It can be used by security personnel to detect unauthorized devices on a company’s telephone network.

Ethical Hacking - Skills
As an ethical hacker, you will need to understand various hacking techniques such as −

Password guessing and cracking
Session hijacking
Session spoofing
Network traffic sniffing
Denial of Service attacks
Exploiting buffer overflow vulnerabilities
SQL injection
In this chapter, we will discuss some of the skills that you would require to become an expert in Ethical Hacking.

Basic Skills
Computer Hacking is a Science as well as an Art. Like any other expertise, you need to put a lot of effort in order to acquire knowledge and become an expert hacker. Once you are on the track, you would need more effort to keep up-to-date with latest technologies, new vulnerabilities and exploitation techniques.

An ethical hacker must be a computer systems expert and needs to have very strong programming and computer networking skills.

An ethical hacker needs to have a lot of patience, persistence, and perseverance to try again and again and wait for the required result.

Additionally, an ethical hacker should be smart enough to understand the situation and other users’ mind-set in order to apply social engineering exploits. A good ethical hacker has great problem-solving skills too.

Courses & Certifications
This tutorial provides the basic guidelines to become a successful Ethical Hacker. If you want to excel in this field, then you might choose to pursue the following courses and certifications −

Obtain a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science or A+ Certificate to gain an understanding of the most common hardware and software technologies.

Get into a programmer’s role for a few years and then switch to get a tech support position.

Proceed to get network certifications like Network+ or CCNA and then security certifications like Security+, CISSP, or TICSA.

It is recommended that you get some work experience as a Network Engineer and System Administrator to understand networks and systems inside out.

Keep going through various books, tutorials and papers to understand various computer security aspects and take them as a challenge to secure your network and computer systems as network security engineer.

Study courses which cover creating Trojan horses, backdoors, viruses, and worms, denial of service (DoS) attacks, SQL injection, buffer overflow, session hijacking, and system hacking.

Master the art of penetration testing, footprinting and reconnaissance, and social engineering.

Finally go for a Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH) Certification.

GIAC (Global Information Assurance Certification) and Offensive Security Certified Professional (OSCP) are additional IT security certifications which will add a lot of value to your profile.

Final Note
You need to stay as a White Hat Hacker which means you need to work within given boundaries. Never intrude or attack any computer or network without a required permission from the authorities.

As a final note, it is highly recommended that you refrain from engaging yourself in black hat hacking which may spoil your entire career.

Ethical Hacking - Process
Like all good projects, ethical hacking too has a set of distinct phases. It helps hackers to make a structured ethical hacking attack.

Different security training manuals explain the process of ethical hacking in different ways, but for me as a Certified Ethical Hacker, the entire process can be categorized into the following six phases.

Ethical Hacking Process
Reconnaissance
Reconnaissance is the phase where the attacker gathers information about a target using active or passive means. The tools that are widely used in this process are NMAP, Hping, Maltego, and Google Dorks.

Scanning
In this process, the attacker begins to actively probe a target machine or network for vulnerabilities that can be exploited. The tools used in this process are Nessus, Nexpose, and NMAP.

Gaining Access
In this process, the vulnerability is located and you attempt to exploit it in order to enter into the system. The primary tool that is used in this process is Metasploit.

Maintaining Access
It is the process where the hacker has already gained access into a system. After gaining access, the hacker installs some backdoors in order to enter into the system when he needs access in this owned system in future. Metasploit is the preferred tool in this process.

Clearing Tracks
This process is actually an unethical activity. It has to do with the deletion of logs of all the activities that take place during the hacking process.

Reporting
Reporting is the last step of finishing the ethical hacking process. Here the Ethical Hacker compiles a report with his findings and the job that was done such as the tools used, the success rate, vulnerabilities found, and the exploit processes.

Quick Tip
The processes are not standard. You can adopt a set of different processes and tools according to your techniques that you are comfortable with. The process is of least significance as long as you are able to get the desired results.

Ethical Hacking - Reconnaissance
Information Gathering and getting to know the target systems is the first process in ethical hacking. Reconnaissance is a set of processes and techniques (Footprinting, Scanning & Enumeration) used to covertly discover and collect information about a target system.

During reconnaissance, an ethical hacker attempts to gather as much information about a target system as possible, following the seven steps listed below −

Gather initial information
Determine the network range
Identify active machines
Discover open ports and access points
Fingerprint the operating system
Uncover services on ports
Map the network
We will discuss in detail all these steps in the subsequent chapters of this tutorial. Reconnaissance takes place in two parts − Active Reconnaissance and Passive Reconnaissance.

Active Reconnaissance
In this process, you will directly interact with the computer system to gain information. This information can be relevant and accurate. But there is a risk of getting detected if you are planning active reconnaissance without permission. If you are detected, then system admin can take severe action against you and trail your subsequent activities.

Passive Reconnaissance
In this process, you will not be directly connected to a computer system. This process is used to gather essential information without ever interacting with the target systems.

Ethical Hacking - Footprinting
Footprinting is a part of reconnaissance process which is used for gathering possible information about a target computer system or network. Footprinting could be both passive and active. Reviewing a company’s website is an example of passive footprinting, whereas attempting to gain access to sensitive information through social engineering is an example of active information gathering.

Footprinting is basically the first step where hacker gathers as much information as possible to find ways to intrude into a target system or at least decide what type of attacks will be more suitable for the target.

During this phase, a hacker can collect the following information −

Domain name
IP Addresses
Namespaces
Employee information
Phone numbers
E-mails
Job Information
In the following section, we will discuss how to extract the basic and easily accessible information about any computer system or network that is linked to the Internet.

Domain Name Information
You can use http://www.whois.com/whois website to get detailed information about a domain name information including its owner, its registrar, date of registration, expiry, name server, owner's contact information, etc.

Whois
Here is a sample record of www.tutorialspoint.com extracted from WHOIS Lookup −

Whois Record
Quick Fix
It's always recommended to keep your domain name profile a private one which should hide the above-mentioned information from potential hackers.

Finding IP Address
You can use ping command at your prompt. This command is available on Windows as well as on Linux OS. Following is the example to find out the IP address of tutorialspoint.com

$ping tutorialspoint.com
It will produce the following result −

PING tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 56(84) bytes of data. 
64 bytes from 66.135.33.172: icmp_seq = 1 ttl = 64 time = 0.028 ms 
64 bytes from 66.135.33.172: icmp_seq = 2 ttl = 64 time = 0.021 ms 
64 bytes from 66.135.33.172: icmp_seq = 3 ttl = 64 time = 0.021 ms 
64 bytes from 66.135.33.172: icmp_seq = 4 ttl = 64 time = 0.021 ms
Finding Hosting Company
Once you have the website address, you can get further detail by using ip2location.com website. Following is the example to find out the details of an IP address −

Ip2location
Here the ISP row gives you the detail about the hosting company because IP addresses are usually provided by hosting companies only.

Quick Fix
If a computer system or network is linked with the Internet directly, then you cannot hide the IP address and the related information such as the hosting company, its location, ISP, etc. If you have a server containing very sensitive data, then it is recommended to keep it behind a secure proxy so that hackers cannot get the exact details of your actual server. This way, it will be difficult for any potential hacker to reach your server directly.

Another effective way of hiding your system IP and ultimately all the associated information is to go through a Virtual Private Network (VPN). If you configure a VPN, then the whole traffic routes through the VPN network, so your true IP address assigned by your ISP is always hidden.

IP Address Ranges
Small sites may have a single IP address associated with them, but larger websites usually have multiple IP addresses serving different domains and sub-domains.

You can obtain a range of IP addresses assigned to a particular company using American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN).

Arin
You can enter company name in the highlighted search box to find out a list of all the assigned IP addresses to that company.

History of the Website
It is very easy to get a complete history of any website using www.archive.org.

Archive
You can enter a domain name in the search box to find out how the website was looking at a given point of time and what were the pages available on the website on different dates.

Archive Record
Quick Fix
Though there are some advantages of keeping your website in an archive database, but if you do not like anybody to see how your website progressed through different stages, then you can request archive.org to delete the history of your website.

Ethical Hacking - Fingerprinting
The term OS fingerprinting in Ethical Hacking refers to any method used to determine what operating system is running on a remote computer. This could be −

Active Fingerprinting − Active fingerprinting is accomplished by sending specially crafted packets to a target machine and then noting down its response and analyzing the gathered information to determine the target OS. In the following section, we have given an example to explain how you can use NMAP tool to detect the OS of a target domain.

Passive Fingerprinting − Passive fingerprinting is based on sniffer traces from the remote system. Based on the sniffer traces (such as Wireshark) of the packets, you can determine the operating system of the remote host.

We have the following four important elements that we will look at to determine the operating system −

TTL − What the operating system sets the Time-To-Live on the outbound packet.

Window Size − What the operating system sets the Window Size at.

DF − Does the operating system set the Don't Fragment bit.

TOS − Does the operating system set the Type of Service, and if so, at what.

By analyzing these factors of a packet, you may be able to determine the remote operating system. This system is not 100% accurate, and works better for some operating systems than others.

Basic Steps
Before attacking a system, it is required that you know what operating system is hosting a website. Once a target OS is known, then it becomes easy to determine which vulnerabilities might be present to exploit the target system.

Below is a simple nmap command which can be used to identify the operating system serving a website and all the opened ports associated with the domain name, i.e., the IP address.

$nmap -O -v tutorialspoint.com 
It will show you the following sensitive information about the given domain name or IP address −

Starting Nmap 5.51 ( http://nmap.org ) at 2015-10-04 09:57 CDT 
Initiating Parallel DNS resolution of 1 host. at 09:57 
Completed Parallel DNS resolution of 1 host. at 09:57, 0.00s elapsed 
Initiating SYN Stealth Scan at 09:57
Scanning tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) [1000 ports] 
Discovered open port 22/tcp on 66.135.33.172 
Discovered open port 3306/tcp on 66.135.33.172 
Discovered open port 80/tcp on 66.135.33.172 
Discovered open port 443/tcp on 66.135.33.172 
Completed SYN Stealth Scan at 09:57, 0.04s elapsed (1000 total ports) 
Initiating OS detection (try #1) against tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Retrying OS detection (try #2) against tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Retrying OS detection (try #3) against tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Retrying OS detection (try #4) against tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Retrying OS detection (try #5) against tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Nmap scan report for tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Host is up (0.000038s latency). 
Not shown: 996 closed ports 
PORT     STATE SERVICE 
22/tcp   open  ssh 
80/tcp   open  http 
443/tcp  open  https 
3306/tcp open  mysql  

TCP/IP fingerprint: 
OS:SCAN(V=5.51%D=10/4%OT=22%CT=1%CU=40379%PV=N%DS=0%DC=L%G=Y%TM=56113E6D%P= 
OS:x86_64-redhat-linux-gnu)SEQ(SP=106%GCD=1%ISR=109%TI=Z%CI=Z%II=I%TS=A)OPS 
OS:(O1=MFFD7ST11NW7%O2=MFFD7ST11NW7%O3=MFFD7NNT11NW7%O4=MFFD7ST11NW7%O5=MFF 
OS:D7ST11NW7%O6=MFFD7ST11)WIN(W1=FFCB%W2=FFCB%W3=FFCB%W4=FFCB%W5=FFCB%W6=FF 
OS:CB)ECN(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%W=FFD7%O=MFFD7NNSNW7%CC=Y%Q=)T1(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%S=O%A 
OS:=S+%F=AS%RD=0%Q=)T2(R=N)T3(R=N)T4(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%W=0%S=A%A=Z%F=R%O=%RD=0% 
OS:Q=)T5(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%W=0%S=Z%A=S+%F=AR%O=%RD=0%Q=)T6(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%W=0%S= 
OS:A%A=Z%F=R%O=%RD=0%Q=)T7(R=Y%DF=Y%T=40%W=0%S=Z%A=S+%F=AR%O=%RD=0%Q=)U1(R= 
OS:Y%DF=N%T=40%IPL=164%UN=0%RIPL=G%RID=G%RIPCK=G%RUCK=G%RUD=G)IE(R=Y%DFI=N% 
OS:T=40%CD=S)
If you do not have nmap command installed on your Linux system, then you can install it using the following yum command −

$yum install nmap
You can go through nmap command in detail to check and understand the different features associated with a system and secure it against malicious attacks.

Quick Fix
You can hide your main system behind a secure proxy server or a VPN so that your complete identity is safe and ultimately your main system remains safe.

Port Scanning
We have just seen information given by nmap command. This command lists down all the open ports on a given server.

PORT       STATE   SERVICE 
22/tcp     open    ssh 
80/tcp     open    http 
443/tcp    open    https 
3306/tcp   open    mysql
You can also check if a particular port is opened or not using the following command −

$nmap -sT -p 443 tutorialspoint.com
It will produce the following result −

Starting Nmap 5.51 ( http://nmap.org ) at 2015-10-04 10:19 CDT 
Nmap scan report for tutorialspoint.com (66.135.33.172) 
Host is up (0.000067s latency). 
PORT    STATE SERVICE 
443/tcp open  https  

Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 0.04 seconds
Once a hacker knows about open ports, then he can plan different attack techniques through the open ports.

Quick Fix
It is always recommended to check and close all the unwanted ports to safeguard the system from malicious attacks.

Ping Sweep
A ping sweep is a network scanning technique that you can use to determine which IP address from a range of IP addresses map to live hosts. Ping Sweep is also known as ICMP sweep.

You can use fping command for ping sweep. This command is a ping-like program which uses the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) echo request to determine if a host is up.

fping is different from ping in that you can specify any number of hosts on the command line, or specify a file containing the lists of hosts to ping. If a host does not respond within a certain time limit and/or retry limit, it will be considered unreachable.

Quick Fix
To disable ping sweeps on a network, you can block ICMP ECHO requests from outside sources. This can be done using the following command which will create a firewall rule in iptable.

$iptables -A OUTPUT -p icmp --icmp-type echo-request -j DROP
DNS Enumeration
Domain Name Server (DNS) is like a map or an address book. In fact, it is like a distributed database which is used to translate an IP address 192.111.1.120 to a name www.example.com and vice versa.

DNS enumeration is the process of locating all the DNS servers and their corresponding records for an organization. The idea is to gather as much interesting details as possible about your target before initiating an attack.

You can use nslookup command available on Linux to get DNS and host-related information. In addition, you can use the following DNSenum script to get detailed information about a domain −

DNSenum.pl

DNSenum script can perform the following important operations −

Get the host's addresses

Get the nameservers

Get the MX record

Perform axfr queries on nameservers

Get extra names and subdomains via Google scraping

Brute force subdomains from file can also perform recursion on subdomain that has NS records

Calculate C class domain network ranges and perform whois queries on them

Perform reverse lookups on netranges

Quick Fix
DNS Enumeration does not have a quick fix and it is really beyond the scope of this tutorial. Preventing DNS Enumeration is a big challenge.

If your DNS is not configured in a secure way, it is possible that lots of sensitive information about the network and organization can go outside and an untrusted Internet user can perform a DNS zone transfer.

Ethical Hacking - Sniffing
Sniffing is the process of monitoring and capturing all the packets passing through a given network using sniffing tools. It is a form of “tapping phone wires” and get to know about the conversation. It is also called wiretapping applied to the computer networks.

There is so much possibility that if a set of enterprise switch ports is open, then one of their employees can sniff the whole traffic of the network. Anyone in the same physical location can plug into the network using Ethernet cable or connect wirelessly to that network and sniff the total traffic.

In other words, Sniffing allows you to see all sorts of traffic, both protected and unprotected. In the right conditions and with the right protocols in place, an attacking party may be able to gather information that can be used for further attacks or to cause other issues for the network or system owner.

What can be sniffed?
One can sniff the following sensitive information from a network −

Email traffic
FTP passwords
Web traffics
Telnet passwords
Router configuration
Chat sessions
DNS traffic
How it works
A sniffer normally turns the NIC of the system to the promiscuous mode so that it listens to all the data transmitted on its segment.

Promiscuous mode refers to the unique way of Ethernet hardware, in particular, network interface cards (NICs), that allows an NIC to receive all traffic on the network, even if it is not addressed to this NIC. By default, a NIC ignores all traffic that is not addressed to it, which is done by comparing the destination address of the Ethernet packet with the hardware address (a.k.a. MAC) of the device. While this makes perfect sense for networking, non-promiscuous mode makes it difficult to use network monitoring and analysis software for diagnosing connectivity issues or traffic accounting.

Sniffing Networks
A sniffer can continuously monitor all the traffic to a computer through the NIC by decoding the information encapsulated in the data packets.

Types of Sniffing
Sniffing can be either Active or Passive in nature.

Passive Sniffing
In passive sniffing, the traffic is locked but it is not altered in any way. Passive sniffing allows listening only. It works with Hub devices. On a hub device, the traffic is sent to all the ports. In a network that uses hubs to connect systems, all hosts on the network can see the traffic. Therefore, an attacker can easily capture traffic going through.

The good news is that hubs are almost obsolete nowadays. Most modern networks use switches. Hence, passive sniffing is no more effective.

Active Sniffing
In active sniffing, the traffic is not only locked and monitored, but it may also be altered in some way as determined by the attack. Active sniffing is used to sniff a switch-based network. It involves injecting address resolution packets (ARP) into a target network to flood on the switch content addressable memory (CAM) table. CAM keeps track of which host is connected to which port.

Following are the Active Sniffing Techniques −

MAC Flooding
DHCP Attacks
DNS Poisoning
Spoofing Attacks
ARP Poisoning
Protocols which are affected
Protocols such as the tried and true TCP/IP were never designed with security in mind and therefore do not offer much resistance to potential intruders. Several rules lend themselves to easy sniffing −

HTTP − It is used to send information in the clear text without any encryption and thus a real target.

SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) − SMTP is basically utilized in the transfer of emails. This protocol is efficient, but it does not include any protection against sniffing.

NNTP (Network News Transfer Protocol)− It is used for all types of communications, but its main drawback is that data and even passwords are sent over the network as clear text.

POP (Post Office Protocol) − POP is strictly used to receive emails from the servers. This protocol does not include protection against sniffing because it can be trapped.

FTP (File Transfer Protocol) − FTP is used to send and receive files, but it does not offer any security features. All the data is sent as clear text that can be easily sniffed.

IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol) − IMAP is same as SMTP in its functions, but it is highly vulnerable to sniffing.

Telnet − Telnet sends everything (usernames, passwords, keystrokes) over the network as clear text and hence, it can be easily sniffed.

Sniffers are not the dumb utilities that allow you to view only live traffic. If you really want to analyze each packet, save the capture and review it whenever time allows.

Hardware Protocol Analyzers
Before we go into further details of sniffers, it is important that we discuss about hardware protocol analyzers. These devices plug into the network at the hardware level and can monitor traffic without manipulating it.

Hardware protocol analyzers are used to monitor and identify malicious network traffic generated by hacking software installed in the system.

They capture a data packet, decode it, and analyze its content according to certain rules.

Hardware protocol analyzers allow attackers to see individual data bytes of each packet passing through the cable.

These hardware devices are not readily available to most ethical hackers due to their enormous cost in many cases.

Lawful Interception
Lawful Interception (LI) is defined as legally sanctioned access to communications network data such as telephone calls or email messages. LI must always be in pursuance of a lawful authority for the purpose of analysis or evidence. Therefore, LI is a security process in which a network operator or service provider gives law enforcement officials permission to access private communications of individuals or organizations.

Almost all countries have drafted and enacted legislation to regulate lawful interception procedures; standardization groups are creating LI technology specifications. Usually, LI activities are taken for the purpose of infrastructure protection and cyber security. However, operators of private network infrastructures can maintain LI capabilities within their own networks as an inherent right, unless otherwise prohibited.

LI was formerly known as wiretapping and has existed since the inception of electronic communications.

Ethical Hacking - Sniffing Tools
There are so many tools available to perform sniffing over a network, and they all have their own features to help a hacker analyze traffic and dissect the information. Sniffing tools are extremely common applications. We have listed here some of the interesting ones −

BetterCAP − BetterCAP is a powerful, flexible and portable tool created to perform various types of MITM attacks against a network, manipulate HTTP, HTTPS and TCP traffic in real-time, sniff for credentials, and much more.

Ettercap − Ettercap is a comprehensive suite for man-in-the-middle attacks. It features sniffing of live connections, content filtering on the fly and many other interesting tricks. It supports active and passive dissection of many protocols and includes many features for network and host analysis.

Wireshark − It is one of the most widely known and used packet sniffers. It offers a tremendous number of features designed to assist in the dissection and analysis of traffic.

Tcpdump − It is a well-known command-line packet analyzer. It provides the ability to intercept and observe TCP/IP and other packets during transmission over the network. Available at www.tcpdump.org.

WinDump − A Windows port of the popular Linux packet sniffer tcpdump, which is a command-line tool that is perfect for displaying header information.

OmniPeek − Manufactured by WildPackets, OmniPeek is a commercial product that is the evolution of the product EtherPeek.

Dsniff − A suite of tools designed to perform sniffing with different protocols with the intent of intercepting and revealing passwords. Dsniff is designed for Unix and Linux platforms and does not have a full equivalent on the Windows platform.

EtherApe − It is a Linux/Unix tool designed to display graphically a system's incoming and outgoing connections.

MSN Sniffer − It is a sniffing utility specifically designed for sniffing traffic generated by the MSN Messenger application.

NetWitness NextGen − It includes a hardware-based sniffer, along with other features, designed to monitor and analyze all traffic on a network. This tool is used by the FBI and other law enforcement agencies.

A potential hacker can use any of these sniffing tools to analyze traffic on a network and dissect information.

Ethical Hacking - ARP Poisoning
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is a stateless protocol used for resolving IP addresses to machine MAC addresses. All network devices that need to communicate on the network broadcast ARP queries in the system to find out other machines’ MAC addresses. ARP Poisoning is also known as ARP Spoofing.

Here is how ARP works −

When one machine needs to communicate with another, it looks up its ARP table.

If the MAC address is not found in the table, the ARP_request is broadcasted over the network.

All machines on the network will compare this IP address to MAC address.

If one of the machines in the network identifies this address, then it will respond to the ARP_request with its IP and MAC address.

The requesting computer will store the address pair in its ARP table and communication will take place.

What is ARP Spoofing?
ARP packets can be forged to send data to the attacker’s machine.

ARP spoofing constructs a large number of forged ARP request and reply packets to overload the switch.

The switch is set in forwarding mode and after the ARP table is flooded with spoofed ARP responses, the attackers can sniff all network packets.

Attackers flood a target computer ARP cache with forged entries, which is also known as poisoning. ARP poisoning uses Man-in-the-Middle access to poison the network.

What is MITM?
The Man-in-the-Middle attack (abbreviated MITM, MitM, MIM, MiM, MITMA) implies an active attack where the adversary impersonates the user by creating a connection between the victims and sends messages between them. In this case, the victims think that they are communicating with each other, but in reality, the malicious actor controls the communication.

Third Person
A third person exists to control and monitor the traffic of communication between two parties. Some protocols such as SSL serve to prevent this type of attack.

ARP Poisoning − Exercise
In this exercise, we have used BetterCAP to perform ARP poisoning in LAN environment using VMware workstation in which we have installed Kali Linux and Ettercap tool to sniff the local traffic in LAN.

For this exercise, you would need the following tools −

VMware workstation
Kali Linux or Linux Operating system
Ettercap Tool
LAN connection
Note − This attack is possible in wired and wireless networks. You can perform this attack in local LAN.

Step 1 − Install the VMware workstation and install the Kali Linux operating system.

Step 2 − Login into the Kali Linux using username pass “root, toor”.

Step 3 − Make sure you are connected to local LAN and check the IP address by typing the command ifconfig in the terminal.

Ifconfig
Step 4 − Open up the terminal and type “Ettercap –G” to start the graphical version of Ettercap.

Ettercap
Step 5 − Now click the tab “sniff” in the menu bar and select “unified sniffing” and click OK to select the interface. We are going to use “eth0” which means Ethernet connection.

Ettercap Input
Step 6 − Now click the “hosts” tab in the menu bar and click “scan for hosts”. It will start scanning the whole network for the alive hosts.

Step 7 − Next, click the “hosts” tab and select “hosts list” to see the number of hosts available in the network. This list also includes the default gateway address. We have to be careful when we select the targets.

Host Tab
Step 8 − Now we have to choose the targets. In MITM, our target is the host machine, and the route will be the router address to forward the traffic. In an MITM attack, the attacker intercepts the network and sniffs the packets. So, we will add the victim as “target 1” and the router address as “target 2.”

In VMware environment, the default gateway will always end with “2” because “1” is assigned to the physical machine.

Step 9 − In this scenario, our target is “192.168.121.129” and the router is “192.168.121.2”. So we will add target 1 as victim IP and target 2 as router IP.

Target
Step 10 − Now click on “MITM” and click “ARP poisoning”. Thereafter, check the option “Sniff remote connections” and click OK.

Mitm Attack
Step 11 − Click “start” and select “start sniffing”. This will start ARP poisoning in the network which means we have enabled our network card in “promiscuous mode” and now the local traffic can be sniffed.

Note − We have allowed only HTTP sniffing with Ettercap, so don’t expect HTTPS packets to be sniffed with this process.

Step 12 − Now it’s time to see the results; if our victim logged into some websites. You can see the results in the toolbar of Ettercap.

Result
This is how sniffing works. You must have understood how easy it is to get the HTTP credentials just by enabling ARP poisoning.

ARP Poisoning has the potential to cause huge losses in company environments. This is the place where ethical hackers are appointed to secure the networks.

Like ARP poisoning, there are other attacks such as MAC flooding, MAC spoofing, DNS poisoning, ICMP poisoning, etc. that can cause significant loss to a network.

In the next chapter, we will discuss another type of attack known as DNS poisoning.

Ethical Hacking - DNS Poisoning
DNS Poisoning is a technique that tricks a DNS server into believing that it has received authentic information when, in reality, it has not. It results in the substitution of false IP address at the DNS level where web addresses are converted into numeric IP addresses. It allows an attacker to replace IP address entries for a target site on a given DNS server with IP address of the server controls. An attacker can create fake DNS entries for the server which may contain malicious content with the same name.

For instance, a user types www.google.com, but the user is sent to another fraud site instead of being directed to Google’s servers. As we understand, DNS poisoning is used to redirect the users to fake pages which are managed by the attackers.

DNS Poisoning − Exercise
Let’s do an exercise on DNS poisoning using the same tool, Ettercap.

DNS Poisoning is quite similar to ARP Poisoning. To initiate DNS poisoning, you have to start with ARP poisoning, which we have already discussed in the previous chapter. We will use DNS spoof plugin which is already there in Ettercap.

Step 1 − Open up the terminal and type “nano etter.dns”. This file contains all entries for DNS addresses which is used by Ettercap to resolve the domain name addresses. In this file, we will add a fake entry of “Facebook”. If someone wants to open Facebook, he will be redirected to another website.

Terminal
Step 2 − Now insert the entries under the words “Redirect it to www.linux.org”. See the following example −

Redirect
Step 3 − Now save this file and exit by saving the file. Use “ctrl+x” to save the file.

Step 4 − After this, the whole process is same to start ARP poisoning. After starting ARP poisoning, click on “plugins” in the menu bar and select “dns_spoof” plugin.

Plugins
Step 5 − After activating the DNS_spoof, you will see in the results that facebook.com will start spoofed to Google IP whenever someone types it in his browser.

Activating
It means the user gets the Google page instead of facebook.com on their browser.

In this exercise, we saw how network traffic can be sniffed through different tools and methods. Here a company needs an ethical hacker to provide network security to stop all these attacks. Let’s see what an ethical hacker can do to prevent DNS Poisoning.

Defenses against DNS Poisoning
As an ethical hacker, your work could very likely put you in a position of prevention rather than pen testing. What you know as an attacker can help you prevent the very techniques you employ from the outside.

Here are defenses against the attacks we just covered from a pen tester’s perspective −

Use a hardware-switched network for the most sensitive portions of your network in an effort to isolate traffic to a single segment or collision domain.

Implement IP DHCP Snooping on switches to prevent ARP poisoning and spoofing attacks.

Implement policies to prevent promiscuous mode on network adapters.

Be careful when deploying wireless access points, knowing that all traffic on the wireless network is subject to sniffing.

Encrypt your sensitive traffic using an encrypting protocol such as SSH or IPsec.

Port security is used by switches that have the ability to be programmed to allow only specific MAC addresses to send and receive data on each port.

IPv6 has security benefits and options that IPv4 does not have.

Replacing protocols such as FTP and Telnet with SSH is an effective defense against sniffing. If SSH is not a viable solution, consider protecting older legacy protocols with IPsec.

Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) can provide an effective defense against sniffing due to their encryption aspect.

SSL is a great defense along with IPsec.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how attackers can capture and analyze all the traffic by placing a packet sniffer in a network. With a real-time example, we saw how easy it is to get the credentials of a victim from a given network. Attackers use MAC attacks, ARP and DNS poisoning attacks to sniff the network traffic and get hold of sensitive information such as email conversations and passwords.

Ethical Hacking - Exploitation
Exploitation is a piece of programmed software or script which can allow hackers to take control over a system, exploiting its vulnerabilities. Hackers normally use vulnerability scanners like Nessus, Nexpose, OpenVAS, etc. to find these vulnerabilities.

Metasploit is a powerful tool to locate vulnerabilities in a system.

Metasploit
Based on the vulnerabilities, we find exploits. Here, we will discuss some of the best vulnerability search engines that you can use.

Exploit Database
www.exploit-db.com is the place where you can find all the exploits related to a vulnerability.

Exploit
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) is the standard for information security vulnerability names. CVE is a dictionary of publicly known information security vulnerabilities and exposures. It’s free for public use. https://cve.mitre.org

CVE
National Vulnerability Database
National Vulnerability Database (NVD) is the U.S. government repository of standards based vulnerability management data. This data enables automation of vulnerability management, security measurement, and compliance. You can locate this database at − https://nvd.nist.gov

NVD includes databases of security checklists, security-related software flaws, misconfigurations, product names, and impact metrics.

National Vulnerability
In general, you will see that there are two types of exploits −

Remote Exploits − These are the type of exploits where you don’t have access to a remote system or network. Hackers use remote exploits to gain access to systems that are located at remote places.

Local Exploits − Local exploits are generally used by a system user having access to a local system, but who wants to overpass his rights.

Quick Fix
Vulnerabilities generally arise due to missing updates, so it is recommended that you update your system on a regular basis, for example, once a week.

In Windows environment, you can activate automatic updates by using the options available in the Control Panel → System and Security → Windows Updates.

Windows Environment
In Linux Centos, you can use the following command to install automatic update package.

yum -y install yum-cron
Ethical Hacking - Enumeration
Enumeration belongs to the first phase of Ethical Hacking, i.e., “Information Gathering”. This is a process where the attacker establishes an active connection with the victim and try to discover as much attack vectors as possible, which can be used to exploit the systems further.

Enumeration can be used to gain information on −

Network shares
SNMP data, if they are not secured properly
IP tables
Usernames of different systems
Passwords policies lists
Enumerations depend on the services that the systems offer. They can be −

DNS enumeration
NTP enumeration
SNMP enumeration
Linux/Windows enumeration
SMB enumeration
Let us now discuss some of the tools that are widely used for Enumeration.

NTP Suite
NTP Suite is used for NTP enumeration. This is important because in a network environment, you can find other primary servers that help the hosts to update their times and you can do it without authenticating the system.

Take a look at the following example.

ntpdate 192.168.1.100 01 Sept 12:50:49 ntpdate[627]: 
adjust time server 192.168.1.100 offset 0.005030 sec 

or 
ntpdc [-ilnps] [-c command] [hostname/IP_address] 
  
root@test]# ntpdc -c sysinfo 192.168.1.100 
***Warning changing to older implementation 
***Warning changing the request packet size from 160 to 48 
system peer: 192.168.1.101 

system peer mode: client
leap indicator: 00 
stratum: 5  

precision: -15 
root distance: 0.00107 s 
root dispersion: 0.02306 s 
reference ID: [192.168.1.101] 
reference time: f66s4f45.f633e130, Sept 01 2016 22:06:23.458 
system flags: monitor ntp stats calibrate 
jitter: 0.000000 s 
stability: 4.256 ppm 
broadcastdelay: 0.003875 s 
authdelay: 0.000107 s
enum4linux
enum4linux is used to enumerate Linux systems. Take a look at the following screenshot and observe how we have found the usernames present in a target host.

enum4linux
smtp-user-enum
smtp-user-enum tries to guess usernames by using SMTP service. Take a look at the following screenshot to understand how it does so.

SMTP
Quick Fix
It is recommended to disable all services that you don’t use. It reduces the possibilities of OS enumeration of the services that your systems are running.

Ethical Hacking - Metasploit
Metasploit is one of the most powerful exploit tools. Most of its resources can be found at: https://www.metasploit.com. It comes in two versions − commercial and free edition. There are no major differences in the two versions, so in this tutorial, we will be mostly using the Community version (free) of Metasploit.

As an Ethical Hacker, you will be using “Kali Distribution” which has the Metasploit community version embedded in it along with other ethical hacking tools. But if you want to install Metasploit as a separate tool, you can easily do so on systems that run on Linux, Windows, or Mac OS X.

The hardware requirements to install Metasploit are −

2 GHz+ processor
1 GB RAM available
1 GB+ available disk space
Matasploit can be used either with command prompt or with Web UI.

To open in Kali, go to Applications → Exploitation Tools → metasploit.

Exploitation Tools
After Metasploit starts, you will see the following screen. Highlighted in red underline is the version of Metasploit.

Highlighted Metaspolit
Exploits of Metasploit
From Vulnerability Scanner, we found that the Linux machine that we have for test is vulnerable to FTP service. Now, we will use the exploit that can work for us. The command is −

use “exploit path”
The screen will appear as follows −

Exploit Path
Then type mfs> show options in order to see what parameters you have to set in order to make it functional. As shown in the following screenshot, we have to set RHOST as the “target IP”.

Show Options
We type msf> set RHOST 192.168.1.101 and msf>set RPORT 21

Set Report
Then, type mfs>run. If the exploit is successful, then it will open one session that you can interact with, as shown in the following screenshot.

Open Session
Metasploit Payloads
Payload, in simple terms, are simple scripts that the hackers utilize to interact with a hacked system. Using payloads, they can transfer data to a victim system.

Metasploit payloads can be of three types −

Singles − Singles are very small and designed to create some kind of communication, then move to the next stage. For example, just creating a user.

Staged − It is a payload that an attacker can use to upload a bigger file onto a victim system.

Stages − Stages are payload components that are downloaded by Stagers modules. The various payload stages provide advanced features with no size limits such as Meterpreter and VNC Injection.

Payload Usage − Example
We use the command show payloads. With this exploit, we can see the payloads that we can use, and it will also show the payloads that will help us upload /execute files onto a victim system.

Payload
Payload Usage
To set the payload that we want, we will use the following command −

set PAYLOAD payload/path
Set the listen host and listen port (LHOST, LPORT) which are the attacker IP and port. Then set remote host and port (RPORT, LHOST) which are the victim IP and port.

Victim IP
Type “exploit”. It will create a session as shown below −

Create Session
Now we can play with the system according to the settings that this payload offers.

Ethical Hacking - Trojan Attacks
Trojans are non-replication programs; they don’t reproduce their own codes by attaching themselves to other executable codes. They operate without the permissions or knowledge of the computer users.

Trojans hide themselves in healthy processes. However we should underline that Trojans infect outside machines only with the assistance of a computer user, like clicking a file that comes attached with email from an unknown person, plugging USB without scanning, opening unsafe URLs.

Trojans have several malicious functions −

They create backdoors to a system. Hackers can use these backdoors to access a victim system and its files. A hacker can use Trojans to edit and delete the files present on a victim system, or to observe the activities of the victim.

Trojans can steal all your financial data like bank accounts, transaction details, PayPal related information, etc. These are called Trojan-Banker.

Trojans can use the victim computer to attack other systems using Denial of Services.

Trojans can encrypt all your files and the hacker may thereafter demand money to decrypt them. These are Ransomware Trojans.

They can use your phones to send SMS to third parties. These are called SMS Trojans.

Trojan Information
If you have found a virus and want to investigate further regarding its function, then we will recommend that you have a look at the following virus databases, which are offered generally by antivirus vendors.

Kaspersky Virus database − https://www.kaspersky.com

F-secure − https://www.f-secure.com

Symantec – Virus Encyclopedia − https://www.symantec.com

Quick Tips
Install a good antivirus and keep it updated.

Don’t open email attachments coming from unknown sources.

Don’t accept invitation from unknown people in social media.

Don’t open URLs sent by unknown people or URLs that are in weird form.

Ethical Hacking - TCP/IP Hijacking
TCP/IP Hijacking is when an authorized user gains access to a genuine network connection of another user. It is done in order to bypass the password authentication which is normally the start of a session.

In theory, a TCP/IP connection is established as shown below −

TCP/IP
To hijack this connection, there are two possibilities −

Find the seq which is a number that increases by 1, but there is no chance to predict it.

The second possibility is to use the Man-in-the-Middle attack which, in simple words, is a type of network sniffing. For sniffing, we use tools like Wireshark or Ethercap.

Example
An attacker monitors the data transmission over a network and discovers the IP’s of two devices that participate in a connection.

When the hacker discovers the IP of one of the users, he can put down the connection of the other user by DoS attack and then resume communication by spoofing the IP of the disconnected user.

Shijack
In practice, one of the best TCP/IP hijack tools is Shijack. It is developed using Python language and you can download it from the following link − https://packetstormsecurity.com/sniffers/shijack.tgz

Here is an example of a Shijack command −

root:/home/root/hijack# ./shijack eth0 192.168.0.100 53517 192.168.0.200 23
Shijack
Here, we are trying to hijack a Telnet connection between the two hosts.

Hunt
Hunt is another popular tool that you can use to hijack a TCP/IP connection. It can be downloaded from − https://packetstormsecurity.com/sniffers/hunt/

Hunt
Quick Tip
All unencrypted sessions are vulnerable to TCP/IP session hijacking, so you should be using encrypted protocols as much as possible. Or, you should use double authentication techniques to keep the session secured.

Ethical Hacking - Email Hijacking
Email Hijacking, or email hacking, is a widespread menace nowadays. It works by using the following three techniques which are email spoofing, social engineering tools, or inserting viruses in a user computer.

Email Spoofing
In email spoofing, the spammer sends emails from a known domain, so the receiver thinks that he knows this person and opens the mail. Such mails normally contain suspicious links, doubtful content, requests to transfer money, etc.

Example
Social Engineering
Spammers send promotional mails to different users, offering huge discount and tricking them to fill their personal data. You have tools available in Kali that can drive you to hijack an email.

Social Engineering
Email hacking can also be done by phishing techniques. See the following screenshot.

Phishing
The links in the email may install malware on the user’s system or redirect the user to a malicious website and trick them into divulging personal and financial information, such as passwords, account IDs or credit card details.

Phishing attacks are widely used by cybercriminals, as it is far easier to trick someone into clicking a malicious links in the email than trying to break through a computer’s defenses.

Inserting Viruses in a User System
The third technique by which a hacker can hijack your email account is by infecting your system with a virus or any other kind of malware. With the help of a virus, a hacker can take all your passwords.

How to detect if your email has been hijacked?
The recipients of spam emails include a bunch of people you know.

You try to access your account and the password no longer works.

You try to access the “Forgot Password” link and it does not go to the expected email.

Your Sent Items folder contains a bunch of spams you are not aware of sending.

Quick tips
In case you think that your email got hijacked, then you need to take the following actions −

Change the passwords immediately.

Notify your friends not to open links that they receive from your email account.

Contact the authorities and report that your account has been hacked.

Install a good antivirus on your computer and update it.

Set up double authentication password if it is supported.

Ethical Hacking - Password Hacking
We have passwords for emails, databases, computer systems, servers, bank accounts, and virtually everything that we want to protect. Passwords are in general the keys to get access into a system or an account.

In general, people tend to set passwords that are easy to remember, such as their date of birth, names of family members, mobile numbers, etc. This is what makes the passwords weak and prone to easy hacking.

One should always take care to have a strong password to defend their accounts from potential hackers. A strong password has the following attributes −

Contains at least 8 characters.

A mix of letters, numbers, and special characters.

A combination of small and capital letters.

Dictionary Attack
In a dictionary attack, the hacker uses a predefined list of words from a dictionary to try and guess the password. If the set password is weak, then a dictionary attack can decode it quite fast.

Hydra is a popular tool that is widely used for dictionary attacks. Take a look at the following screenshot and observe how we have used Hydra to find out the password of an FTP service.

Dictionary Attack
Hybrid Dictionary Attack
Hybrid dictionary attack uses a set of dictionary words combined with extensions. For example, we have the word “admin” and combine it with number extensions such as “admin123”, “admin147”, etc.

Crunch is a wordlist generator where you can specify a standard character set or a character set. Crunch can generate all possible combinations and permutations. This tool comes bundled with the Kali distribution of Linux.

Hybrid Attack
Brute-Force Attack
In a brute-force attack, the hacker uses all possible combinations of letters, numbers, special characters, and small and capital letters to break the password. This type of attack has a high probability of success, but it requires an enormous amount of time to process all the combinations. A brute-force attack is slow and the hacker might require a system with high processing power to perform all those permutations and combinations faster.

John the Ripper or Johnny is one of the powerful tools to set a brute-force attack and it comes bundled with the Kali distribution of Linux.

Brute Force
Rainbow Tables
A rainbow table contains a set of predefined passwords that are hashed. It is a lookup table used especially in recovering plain passwords from a cipher text. During the process of password recovery, it just looks at the pre-calculated hash table to crack the password. The tables can be downloaded from http://project-rainbowcrack.com/table.htm

RainbowCrack 1.6.1 is the tool to use the rainbow tables. It is available again in Kali distribution.

Rainbow Table
Quick Tips
Don’t note down the passwords anywhere, just memorize them.

Set strong passwords that are difficult to crack.

Use a combination of alphabets, digits, symbols, and capital and small letters.

Don’t set passwords that are similar to their usernames.

Ethical Hacking - Wireless Hacking
A wireless network is a set of two or more devices connected with each other via radio waves within a limited space range. The devices in a wireless network have the freedom to be in motion, but be in connection with the network and share data with other devices in the network. One of the most crucial point that they are so spread is that their installation cost is very cheap and fast than the wire networks.

Wireless networks are widely used and it is quite easy to set them up. They use IEEE 802.11 standards. A wireless router is the most important device in a wireless network that connects the users with the Internet.

Wireless Router
In a wireless network, we have Access Points which are extensions of wireless ranges that behave as logical switches.

Access Point
Although wireless networks offer great flexibility, they have their security problems. A hacker can sniff the network packets without having to be in the same building where the network is located. As wireless networks communicate through radio waves, a hacker can easily sniff the network from a nearby location.

Most attackers use network sniffing to find the SSID and hack a wireless network. When our wireless cards are converted in sniffing modes, they are called monitor mode.

Kismet
Kismet is a powerful tool for wireless sniffing that is found in Kali distribution. It can also be downloaded from its official webpage − https://www.kismetwireless.net

Let’s see how it works. First of all, open a terminal and type kismet. Start the Kismet Server and click Yes, as shown in the following screenshot.

Kismet
As shown here, click the Start button.

Start Button
Now, Kismet will start to capture data. The following screenshot shows how it would appear −

Capture Data
NetStumbler
NetStumbler is another tool for wireless hacking that is primarily meant for Windows systems. It can be downloaded from http://www.stumbler.net/

It is quite easy to use NetStumbler on your system. You just have to click the Scanning button and wait for the result, as shown in the following screenshot.

Scanning
It should display a screenshot as follows −

Network Stumbler
It is important to note that your card should support monitoring mode, otherwise you will fail to monitor.

Wired Equivalent Privacy
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) is a security protocol that was invented to secure wireless networks and keep them private. It utilizes encryption at the data link layer which forbids unauthorized access to the network.

The key is used to encrypt the packets before transmission begins. An integrity check mechanism checks that the packets are not altered after transmission.

Note that WEP is not entirely immune to security problems. It suffers from the following issues −

CRC32 is not sufficient to ensure complete cryptographic integrity of a packet.

It is vulnerable to dictionary attacks.

WEP is vulnerable to Denial of Services attacks too.

WEPcrack
WEPcrack is a popular tool to crack WEP passwords. It can be downloaded from − https://sourceforge.net/projects/wepcrack/

WEP Crack
Aircrack-ng
Aircrak-ng is another popular tool for cracking WEP passwords. It can be found in the Kali distribution of Linux.

The following screenshot shows how we have sniffed a wireless network and collected packets and created a file RHAWEP-01.cap. Then we run it with aircrack-ng to decrypt the cypher.

Air Crack
Wireless DoS Attacks
In a wireless environment, an attacker can attack a network from a distance and therefore, it is sometimes difficult to collect evidences against the attacker.

The first type of DoS is Physical Attack. This type of attack is very basic and it is in the base of radio interferences which can be created even from cordless phones that operate in 2.4 GHz range.

Another type is Network DoS Attack. As the Wireless Access Point creates a shared medium, it offers the possibility to flood the traffic of this medium toward the AP which will make its processing more slow toward the clients that attempt to connect. Such attacks can be created just by a ping flood DoS attack.

Pyloris is a popular DoS tool that you can download from − https://sourceforge.net/projects/pyloris/

Low Orbit Ion Cannon (LOIC) is another popular tool for DoS attacks.

DOS Attacks
Quick Tips
To secure a wireless network, you should keep the following points in mind −

Change the SSID and the network password regularly.
Change the default password of access points.
Don’t use WEP encryption.
Turn off guest networking.
Update the firmware of your wireless device.
Ethical Hacking - Social Engineering
Let us try to understand the concept of Social Engineering attacks through some examples.

Example 1
You must have noticed old company documents being thrown into dustbins as garbage. These documents might contain sensitive information such as Names, Phone Numbers, Account Numbers, Social Security Numbers, Addresses, etc. Many companies still use carbon paper in their fax machines and once the roll is over, its carbon goes into dustbin which may have traces of sensitive data. Although it sounds improbable, but attackers can easily retrieve information from the company dumpsters by pilfering through the garbage.

Example 2
An attacker may befriend a company personnel and establish good relationship with him over a period of time. This relationship can be established online through social networks, chatting rooms, or offline at a coffee table, in a playground, or through any other means. The attacker takes the office personnel in confidence and finally digs out the required sensitive information without giving a clue.

Example 3
A social engineer may pretend to be an employee or a valid user or an VIP by faking an identification card or simply by convincing employees of his position in the company. Such an attacker can gain physical access to restricted areas, thus providing further opportunities for attacks.

Example 4
It happens in most of the cases that an attacker might be around you and can do shoulder surfing while you are typing sensitive information like user ID and password, account PIN, etc.

Phishing Attack
A phishing attack is a computer-based social engineering, where an attacker crafts an email that appears legitimate. Such emails have the same look and feel as those received from the original site, but they might contain links to fake websites. If you are not smart enough, then you will type your user ID and password and will try to login which will result in failure and by that time, the attacker will have your ID and password to attack your original account.

Quick Fix
You should enforce a good security policy in your organization and conduct required trainings to make all the employees aware of the possible Social Engineering attacks and their consequences.

Document shredding should be a mandatory activity in your company.

Make double sure that any links that you receive in your email is coming from authentic sources and that they point to correct websites. Otherwise you might end up as a victim of Phishing.

Be professional and never share your ID and password with anybody else in any case.

Ethical Hacking - DDOS Attacks
A Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is an attempt to make an online service or a website unavailable by overloading it with huge floods of traffic generated from multiple sources.

Unlike a Denial of Service (DoS) attack, in which one computer and one Internet connection is used to flood a targeted resource with packets, a DDoS attack uses many computers and many Internet connections, often distributed globally in what is referred to as a botnet.

A large scale volumetric DDoS attack can generate a traffic measured in tens of Gigabits (and even hundreds of Gigabits) per second. We are sure your normal network will not be able to handle such traffic.

What are Botnets?
Attackers build a network of hacked machines which are known as botnets, by spreading malicious piece of code through emails, websites, and social media. Once these computers are infected, they can be controlled remotely, without their owners' knowledge, and used like an army to launch an attack against any target.

DDOS System
A DDoS flood can be generated in multiple ways. For example −

Botnets can be used for sending more number of connection requests than a server can handle at a time.

Attackers can have computers send a victim resource huge amounts of random data to use up the target's bandwidth.

Due to the distributed nature of these machines, they can be used to generate distributed high traffic which may be difficult to handle. It finally results in a complete blockage of a service.

Types of DDoS Attacks
DDoS attacks can be broadly categorized into three categories −

Volume-based Attacks
Protocol Attacks
Application Layer Attacks
Volume-Based Attacks
Volume-based attacks include TCP floods, UDP floods, ICMP floods, and other spoofedpacket floods. These are also called Layer 3 & 4 Attacks. Here, an attacker tries to saturate the bandwidth of the target site. The attack magnitude is measured in Bits per Second (bps).

UDP Flood − A UDP flood is used to flood random ports on a remote host with numerous UDP packets, more specifically port number 53. Specialized firewalls can be used to filter out or block malicious UDP packets.

ICMP Flood − This is similar to UDP flood and used to flood a remote host with numerous ICMP Echo Requests. This type of attack can consume both outgoing and incoming bandwidth and a high volume of ping requests will result in overall system slowdown.

HTTP Flood − The attacker sends HTTP GET and POST requests to a targeted web server in a large volume which cannot be handled by the server and leads to denial of additional connections from legitimate clients.

Amplification Attack − The attacker makes a request that generates a large response which includes DNS requests for large TXT records and HTTP GET requests for large files like images, PDFs, or any other data files.

Protocol Attacks
Protocol attacks include SYN floods, Ping of Death, fragmented packet attacks, Smurf DDoS, etc. This type of attack consumes actual server resources and other resources like firewalls and load balancers. The attack magnitude is measured in Packets per Second.

DNS Flood − DNS floods are used for attacking both the infrastructure and a DNS application to overwhelm a target system and consume all its available network bandwidth.

SYN Flood − The attacker sends TCP connection requests faster than the targeted machine can process them, causing network saturation. Administrators can tweak TCP stacks to mitigate the effect of SYN floods. To reduce the effect of SYN floods, you can reduce the timeout until a stack frees memory allocated to a connection, or selectively dropping incoming connections using a firewall or iptables.

Ping of Death − The attacker sends malformed or oversized packets using a simple ping command. IP allows sending 65,535 bytes packets but sending a ping packet larger than 65,535 bytes violates the Internet Protocol and could cause memory overflow on the target system and finally crash the system. To avoid Ping of Death attacks and its variants, many sites block ICMP ping messages altogether at their firewalls.

Application Layer Attacks
Application Layer Attacks include Slowloris, Zero-day DDoS attacks, DDoS attacks that target Apache, Windows or OpenBSD vulnerabilities and more. Here the goal is to crash the web server. The attack magnitude is measured in Requests per Second.

Application Attack − This is also called Layer 7 Attack, where the attacker makes excessive log-in, database-lookup, or search requests to overload the application. It is really difficult to detect Layer 7 attacks because they resemble legitimate website traffic.

Slowloris − The attacker sends huge number of HTTP headers to a targeted web server, but never completes a request. The targeted server keeps each of these false connections open and eventually overflows the maximum concurrent connection pool, and leads to denial of additional connections from legitimate clients.

NTP Amplification − The attacker exploits publically-accessible Network Time Protocol (NTP) servers to overwhelm the targeted server with User Datagram Protocol (UDP) traffic.

Zero-day DDoS Attacks − A zero-day vulnerability is a system or application flaw previously unknown to the vendor, and has not been fixed or patched. These are new type of attacks coming into existence day by day, for example, exploiting vulnerabilities for which no patch has yet been released.

How to Fix a DDoS Attack
There are quite a few DDoS protection options which you can apply depending on the type of DDoS attack.

Your DDoS protection starts from identifying and closing all the possible OS and application level vulnerabilities in your system, closing all the possible ports, removing unnecessary access from the system and hiding your server behind a proxy or CDN system.

If you see a low magnitude of the DDoS, then you can find many firewall-based solutions which can help you in filtering out DDoS based traffic. But if you have high volume of DDoS attack like in gigabits or even more, then you should take the help of a DDoS protection service provider that offers a more holistic, proactive and genuine approach.

You must be careful while approaching and selecting a DDoS protection service provider. There are number of service providers who want to take advantage of your situation. If you inform them that you are under DDoS attack, then they will start offering you a variety of services at unreasonably high costs.

We can suggest you a simple and working solution which starts with a search for a good DNS solution provider who is flexible enough to configure A and CNAME records for your website. Second, you will need a good CDN provider that can handle big DDoS traffic and provide you DDoS protection service as a part of their CDN package.

Assume your server IP address is AAA.BBB.CCC.DDD. Then you should do the following DNS configuration −

Create a A Record in DNS zone file as shown below with a DNS identifier, for example, ARECORDID and keep it secret from the outside world.

Now ask your CDN provider to link the created DNS identifier with a URL, something like cdn.someotherid.domain.com.

You will use the CDN URL cdn.someotherid.domain.com to create two CNAME records, the first one to point to www and the second record to point to @ as shown below.

You can take the help from your system administrator to understand these points and configure your DNS and CDN appropriately. Finally, you will have the following configuration at your DNS.

DNS Configuration
Now, let the CDN provider handle all type of DDoS attacks and your system will remain safe. But here the condition is that you should not disclose your system's IP address or A record identifier to anyone; else direct attacks will start again.

Quick Fix
DDoS attacks have become more common than ever before, and unfortunately, there is no quick fix for this problem. However, if your system is under a DDoS attack, then don’t panic and start looking into the matter step by step.

Ethical Hacking - Cross-Site Scripting
Cross-site scripting (XSS) is a code injection attack that allows an attacker to execute malicious JavaScript in another user's browser.

The attacker does not directly target his victim. Instead, he exploits a vulnerability in a website that the victim visits, in order to get the website to deliver the malicious JavaScript for him. To the victim's browser, the malicious JavaScript appears to be a legitimate part of the website, and the website has thus acted as an unintentional accomplice to the attacker. These attacks can be carried out using HTML, JavaScript, VBScript, ActiveX, Flash, but the most used XSS is malicious JavaScript.

These attacks also can gather data from account hijacking, changing of user settings, cookie theft/poisoning, or false advertising and create DoS attacks.

Example
Let’s take an example to understand how it works. We have a vulnerable webpage that we got by the metasploitable machine. Now we will test the field that is highlighted in red arrow for XSS.

Metasploitable
First of all, we make a simple alert script

<script>  
   alert(‘I am Vulnerable’)  
</script>
It will produce the following output −

Simple Alert
Types of XSS Attacks
XSS attacks are often divided into three types −

Persistent XSS, where the malicious string originates from the website's database.

Reflected XSS, where the malicious string originates from the victim's request.

DOM-based XSS, where the vulnerability is in the client-side code rather than the server-side code.

Generally, cross-site scripting is found by vulnerability scanners so that you don’t have to do all the manual job by putting a JavaScript on it like

<script>  
   alert('XSS') 
</script>
Burp Suite and acunetix are considered as the best vulnerability scanners.

Quick Tip
To prevent XSS attacks, keep the following points in mind −

Check and validate all the form fields like hidden forms, headers, cookies, query strings.

Implement a stringent security policy. Set character limitation in the input fields.

Ethical Hacking - SQL Injection
SQL injection is a set of SQL commands that are placed in a URL string or in data structures in order to retrieve a response that we want from the databases that are connected with the web applications. This type of attacks generally takes place on webpages developed using PHP or ASP.NET.

An SQL injection attack can be done with the following intentions −

To dump the whole database of a system,

To modify the content of the databases, or

To perform different queries that are not allowed by the application.

This type of attack works when the applications don’t validate the inputs properly, before passing them to an SQL statement. Injections are normally placed put in address bars, search fields, or data fields.

The easiest way to detect if a web application is vulnerable to an SQL injection attack is to use the " ‘ " character in a string and see if you get any error.

Example 1
Let’s try to understand this concept using a few examples. As shown in the following screenshot, we have used a " ‘ " character in the Name field.

Name Field
Now, click the Login button. It should produce the following response −

Login
It means that the “Name” field is vulnerable to SQL injection.

Example 2
We have this URL − http://10.10.10.101/mutillidae/index.php?page=site-footer-xssdiscussion.php

And we want to test the variable “page” but observe how we have injected a " ‘ " character in the string URL.

Variable Page
When we press Enter, it will produce the following result which is with errors.

Result With Errors
SQLMAP
SQLMAP is one of the best tools available to detect SQL injections. It can be downloaded from http://sqlmap.org/

It comes pre-compiled in the Kali distribution. You can locate it at − Applications → Database Assessment → Sqlmap.

After opening SQLMAP, we go to the page that we have the SQL injection and then get the header request. From the header, we run the following command in SQL −

./sqlmap.py --headers="User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Ubuntu; Linux i686; rv:25.0) 
Gecko/20100101 Firefox/25.0" --cookie="security=low;
PHPSESSID=oikbs8qcic2omf5gnd09kihsm7" -u '
http://localhost/dvwa/vulnerabilities/sqli_blind/?id=1&Submit=Submit#' -
level=5 risk=3 -p id --suffix="-BR" -v3
The SQLMAP will test all the variables and the result will show that the parameter “id” is vulnerable, as shown in the following screenshot.

SQL Map
SQLNinja
SQLNinja is another SQL injection tool that is available in Kali distribution.

SQLninja
JSQL Injection
JSQL Injection is in Java and it makes automated SQL injections.

JSQL Injection
Quick Tips
To prevent your web application from SQL injection attacks, you should keep the following points in mind −

Unchecked user-input to database should not be allowed to pass through the application GUI.

Every variable that passes into the application should be sanitized and validated.

The user input which is passed into the database should be quoted.

Ethical Hacking - Pen Testing
Penetration Testing is a method that many companies follow in order to minimize their security breaches. This is a controlled way of hiring a professional who will try to hack your system and show you the loopholes that you should fix.

Before doing a penetration test, it is mandatory to have an agreement that will explicitly mention the following parameters −

what will be the time of penetration test,

where will be the IP source of the attack, and

what will be the penetration fields of the system.

Penetration testing is conducted by professional ethical hackers who mainly use commercial, open-source tools, automate tools and manual checks. There are no restrictions; the most important objective here is to uncover as many security flaws as possible.

Types of Penetration Testing
We have five types of penetration testing −

Black Box − Here, the ethical hacker doesn’t have any information regarding the infrastructure or the network of the organization that he is trying to penetrate. In black-box penetration testing, the hacker tries to find the information by his own means.

Grey Box − It is a type of penetration testing where the ethical hacker has a partial knowledge of the infrastructure, like its domain name server.

White Box − In white-box penetration testing, the ethical hacker is provided with all the necessary information about the infrastructure and the network of the organization that he needs to penetrate.

External Penetration Testing − This type of penetration testing mainly focuses on network infrastructure or servers and their software operating under the infrastructure. In this case, the ethical hacker tries the attack using public networks through the Internet. The hacker attempts to hack the company infrastructure by attacking their webpages, webservers, public DNS servers, etc.

Internal Penetration Testing − In this type of penetration testing, the ethical hacker is inside the network of the company and conducts his tests from there.

Penetration testing can also cause problems such as system malfunctioning, system crashing, or data loss. Therefore, a company should take calculated risks before going ahead with penetration testing. The risk is calculated as follows and it is a management risk.

RISK = Threat × Vulnerability

Example
You have an online e-commerce website that is in production. You want to do a penetration testing before making it live. Here, you have to weigh the pros and cons first. If you go ahead with penetration testing, it might cause interruption of service. On the contrary, if you do not wish to perform a penetration testing, then you can run the risk of having an unpatched vulnerability that will remain as a threat all the time.

Before doing a penetration test, it is recommended that you put down the scope of the project in writing. You should be clear about what is going to be tested. For example −

Your company has a VPN or any other remote access techniques and you want to test that particular point.

Your application has webservers with databases, so you might want to get it tested for SQL injection attacks which is one of the most crucial tests on a webserver. In addition, you can check if your webserver is immune to DoS attacks.

Quick Tips
Before going ahead with a penetration test, you should keep the following points in mind −

First understand your requirements and evaluate all the risks.

Hire a certified person to conduct penetration test because they are trained to apply all the possible methods and techniques to uncover possible loopholes in a network or web application.

Always sign an agreement before doing a penetration test.


because if they forget the true purpose and loss the perserver everything will gone, never all the of true they been see , miseble , decision , who you gonna to be ? 


they have to bear the stress ,and choose what path they have to go , true destination shall cleaer

precessor interrupt filter reaching for the first and final purpose 
filter need put the emotion  on the operation ,and to filter ,learning for this ,they can receive many experience .this passage need to be full record . record the pain and all the emotion . 


physical body synthesis handling 



they have to bear the stress ,and choose what path they have to go , true destination shall cleaer

precessor interrupt filter reaching for the first and final purpose 
filter need put the emotion  on the operation ,and to filter ,learning for this ,they can receive many experience .this passage need to be full record . record the pain and all the emotion . 

can to heistate if did that , it will letting you loss everythings and , those firmly decision ,things abandon behind , it will turn to the consequance ,sawallow them , emotionally but can't to abandon at all , be human weakness are need bear both , ever can to make the decision or change the position they are , keep flip the this balance , they can't to stabilize this balance , can't bear both ,choose one need complate be one ,can to have everything at all this human , if be individual toal , insiste the thing you choose about ,evolution or ganber always doesn't has the 100% percent success get it , you need be very effort , luck is very hard happen on us 
level3 is main target to protection
IF rick.R.block die this the place last he been stay search way recovery him ! 
180.165.15.229 IP Address Location
Reverse IP (PTR)	none
ASN	4812 (China Telecom (Group))
ISP / Organization	China Telecom Shanghai
IP Connection Type	Cable/DSL [internet speed test]
IP Location	Shanghai, Shanghai, China
IP Continent	Asia
IP Country	China (CN)
IP State	Shanghai (SH)
IP City	Shanghai
IP Postcode	unknown
IP Latitude	31.0449 / 31°2′41″ N
IP Longitude	121.4012 / 121°24′4″ E
IP Timezone	Asia/Shanghai
IP Local Time	Wed, 25 Nov 2020 01:26:13 +0800
IANA IPv4 Address Space Allocation for Subnet 180.0.0.0/8
IPv4 Address Space Prefix	180/8
Regional Internet Registry (RIR)	APNIC
Allocation Date	April 2009
WHOIS Server	whois.apnic.net
RDAP Server	https://rdap.apnic.net/
Status	ALLOCATED
Delegated entirely to specific RIR (Regional Internet Registry) as indicated.
180.165.15.229 IP Address Representations
CIDR Notation	180.165.15.229/32
Decimal Notation	3030716389
Hexadecimal Notation	0xb4a50fe5
Octal Notation	026451207745
Binary Notation	10110100101001010000111111100101
Dotted-Decimal Notation	180.165.15.229
Dotted-Hexadecimal Notation	0xb4.0xa5.0x0f.0xe5
Dotted-Octal Notation	0264.0245.017.0345
Dotted-Binary Notation	10110100.10100101.00001111.11100101
this are the address  December 5 

Bone Structure and Function
Your bones are stronger than reinforced concrete. Bone tissue is a composite of fibrous strands of collagen (a type of protein) that resemble the steel rebar in concrete and a hardened mineralized matrix that contains large amounts of calcium, just like concrete. But this is where the similarities end. Bone outperforms reinforced concrete by several orders of magnitude in compression and tension strength tests. Why? The microarchitecture of bone is complex and built to withstand extreme forces. Moreover, bone is a living tissue that is continuously breaking down and forming new bone to adapt to mechanical stresses.

Why Is the Skeletal System Important?
The human skeleton consists of 206 bones and other connective tissues called ligaments, tendons, and cartilage. Ligaments connect bones to other bones, tendons connect bones to muscles, and cartilage provides bones with more flexibility and acts as a cushion in the joints between bones. The skeleton’s many bones and connective tissues allow for multiple types of movement such as typing and running. The skeleton provides structural support and protection for all the other organ systems in the body. The skull, or cranium, is like a helmet and protects the eyes, ears, and brain. The ribs form a cage that surrounds and protects the lungs and heart. In addition to aiding in movement, protecting organs, and providing structural support, red and white blood cells and platelets are synthesized in bone marrow. Another vital function of bones is that they act as a storage depot for minerals such as calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium. Although bone tissue may look inactive at first glance, at the microscopic level you will find that bones are continuously breaking down and reforming. Bones also contain a complex network of canals, blood vessels, and nerves that allow for nutrient transport and communication with other organ systems.

fig 2.10.1.jpg
Figure  2.10.1 : Human Skeletal Structure. The human skeleton contains 206 bones. It is divided into two main parts, the axial and appendicular. Image by Openstax / CC BY Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/3d4e4991-1e5...1a9ab4143bc2@3.
Bone Anatomy and Structure
To optimize bone health through nutrition, it is important to understand bone anatomy. The skeleton is composed of two main parts, the axial and the appendicular parts. The axial skeleton consists of the skull, vertebral column, and rib cage, and is composed of eighty bones. The appendicular skeleton consists of the shoulder girdle, pelvic girdle, and upper and lower extremities, and is composed of 126 bones. Bones are also categorized by size and shape. There are four types of bone: long bones, short bones, flat bones, and irregular bones. The longest bone in your body is the femur (thigh bone), which extends from your hip to your knee. It is a long bone and functions to support your weight as you stand, walk, or run. Your wrist is composed of eight irregular-shaped bones, which allow for the intricate movements of your hands. Your twelve ribs on each side of your body are curved flat bones that protect your heart and lungs. Thus, the bones’ different sizes and shapes allow for their different functions.

Bones are composed of approximately 65 percent inorganic material known as mineralized matrix. This mineralized matrix consists of mostly crystallized hydroxyapatite. The bone’s hard crystal matrix of bone tissue gives it its rigid structure. The other 35 percent of bone is organic material, most of which is the fibrous protein collagen. The collagen fibers are networked throughout bone tissue and provide it with flexibility and strength. The bones’ inorganic and organic materials are structured into two different tissue types. There is spongy bone, also called trabecular or cancellous bone, and compact bone, also called cortical bone (Figure  2.10.2 ). The two tissue types differ in their microarchitecture and porosity. Trabecular bone is 50 to 90 percent porous and appears as a lattice-like structure under the microscope. It is found at the ends of long bones, in the cores of vertebrae, and in the pelvis. Trabecular bone tissue makes up about 20 percent of the adult skeleton. The more dense cortical bone is about 10 percent porous and it looks like many concentric circles, similar to the rings in a tree trunk, sandwiched together (Figure  2.10.3 ). Cortical bone tissue makes up approximately 80 percent of the adult skeleton. It surrounds all trabecular tissue and is the only bone tissue in the shafts of long bones.

fig 2.10.2.jpg
Figure  2.10.2 : The Arrangement of Bone Tissues. The two basic tissue types of bones are trabecular and cortical. This photo shows normal (left) and degraded (right) trabecular (spongy) bone. Image by Gtirouflet / CC BY-SA 3.0.
fig 2.10.3.png
Figure  2.10.3 : Cortical (Compact) Bone. “Compact Bone with osteons”. Image by Lord of Konrad / CC0
Bone tissue is arranged in an organized manner. A thin membrane, called the periosteum, surrounds the bone. It contains connective tissue with many blood vessels and nerves. Lying below the periosteum is the cortical bone. In some bones, the cortical bone surrounds the less-dense trabecular bone and the bone marrow lies within the trabecular bone, but not all bones contain trabecular tissue or marrow.

Bone Tissues and Cells, Modeling and Remodeling
Bone tissue contains many different cell types that constantly resize and reshape bones throughout growth and adulthood. Bone tissue cells include osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and osteocytes. The osteoprogenitor cells are cells that have not matured yet. Once they are stimulated, some will become osteoblasts, the bone builders, and others will become osteoclasts, the cells that break bone down. Osteocytes are the most abundant cells in bone tissue. Osteocytes are star-shaped cells that are networked throughout the bone via their long cytoplasmic arms that allow for the exchange of nutrients and other factors from bones to the blood and lymph.

Bone Modeling and Remodeling
During infancy, childhood, and adolescence, bones are continuously growing and changing shape through two processes called growth (ossification) and modeling. In fact, in the first year of life, almost 100 percent of the bone tissue in the skeleton is replaced. In the process of modeling, bone tissue is dismantled at one site and built up at a different site. In adulthood, our bones stop growing and modeling, but continue to go through a process of bone remodeling. In the process of remodeling, bone tissue is degraded and built up at the same location. About 10 percent of bone tissue is remodeled each year in adults. Bones adapt their structure to the forces acting upon them, even in adulthood. This phenomenon is called Wolff’s law, which states that bones will develop a structure that is best able to resist the forces acting upon them. This is why exercising, especially when it involves weight-bearing activities, increases bone strength.

The first step in bone remodeling is osteocyte activation. Osteocytes detect changes in mechanical forces, calcium homeostasis, or hormone levels. In the second step, osteoclasts are recruited to the site of the degradation. Osteoclasts are large cells with a highly irregular ruffled membrane. These cells fuse tightly to the bone and secrete hydrogen ions, which acidify the local environment and dissolve the minerals in the bone tissue matrix. This process is called bone resorption and resembles pit excavation. Our bodies excavate pits in our bone tissue because bones act as storehouses for calcium and other minerals. Bones supply these minerals to other body tissues as the demand arises. Bone tissue also remodels when it breaks so that it can repair itself. Moreover, if you decide to train to run a marathon your bones will restructure themselves by remodeling to be better able to sustain the forces of their new function.

After a certain amount of bone is excavated, the osteoclasts begin to die and bone resorption stops. In the third step of bone remodeling, the site is prepared for building. In this stage, sugars and proteins accumulate along the bone’s surface, forming a cement line which acts to form a strong bond between the old bone and the new bone that will be made. These first three steps take approximately two to three weeks to complete. In the last step of bone remodeling, osteoblasts lay down new osteoid tissue that fills up the cavities that were excavated during the resorption process. Osteoid is bone matrix tissue that is composed of proteins such as collagen and is not mineralized yet. To make collagen, vitamin C is required. A symptom of vitamin C deficiency (known as scurvy) is bone pain, which is caused by diminished bone remodeling. After the osteoid tissue is built up, the bone tissue begins to mineralize. The last step of bone remodeling continues for months, and for a much longer time afterward the mineralized bone is continuously packed in a more dense fashion.

Thus, we can say that bone is a living tissue that continually adapts itself to mechanical stress through the process of remodeling. For bone tissue to remodel certain nutrients such as calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, fluoride, vitamin D, and vitamin K are required.

Bone Mineral Density Is an Indicator of Bone Health
Bone mineral density (BMD) is a measurement of the amount of calcified tissue in grams per centimeter squared of bone tissue. BMD can be thought of as the total amount of bone mass in a defined area. When BMD is high, bone strength will be great. Similar to measuring blood pressure to predict the risk of stroke, a BMD measurement can help predict the risk of bone fracture. The most common tool used to measure BMD is called dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). During this procedure, a person lies on their back and a DEXA scanner passes two X-ray beams through their body. The amount of X-ray energy that passes through the bone is measured for both beams. The total amount of the X-ray energy that passes through a person varies depending on their bone thickness. Using this information and a defined area of bone, the amount of calcified tissue in grams per unit area (cm2) is calculated. Most often the DEXA scan focuses on measuring BMD in the hip and the spine. These measurements are then used as indicators of overall bone strength and health. DEXA is the cheapest and most accurate way to measure BMD. It also uses the lowest dose of radiation. Other methods of measuring BMD include quantitative computed tomography (QCT) and radiographic absorptiometry. People at risk for developing bone disease are advised to have a DEXA scan. We will discuss the many risk factors linked to an increased incidence of osteoporosis and the steps a person can take to prevent the disease from developing. 

December 2010
Our partner for better health
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong:
Strategy Document
Content
Executive Summary......................................................................................... i
Preamble.......................................................................................................... 1
Chapter 1 Background ............................................................................... 3
Chapter 2 Primary Care in Hong Kong  ..................................................... 4
Chapter 3 Primary Care Development: Progress To-date.......................... 9
Chapter 4 Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies................................ 14
Chapter 5 Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its
Task Forces  ............................................................................... 25
Chapter 6 Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already
Underway .................................................................................. 37
Chapter 7 The Need for Further Development.......................................... 47
Chapter 8 Setting up a Primary Care Office .............................................. 55
Chapter 9 Conclusion................................................................................. 58
Annex A Feedback from the first stage public consultation on healthcare
reform on initiatives to reform primary care and service delivery
in Hong Kong............................................................................ 59
Annex B Health and Medical Development Advisory Committee Working
Group on Primary Care ........................................................... 62
Reference......................................................................................................... 80
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document i
1. Primary care plays a pivotal role in a healthcare system. Its importance,
as highlighted by the World Health Organization and other international health
authorities, is widely recognized internationally. Evidence abounds that a good
primary care system, which entails the provision of accessible first contact care
that is comprehensive, continuing, co-ordinated and person-centred in the context
of family and community, is effective in improving health from a population
point of view and promoting better use of healthcare resources.
2. Healthcare services in Hong Kong are of high standards and delivered
with efficiency. However, in common with many other countries, our healthcare
system is facing major challenges brought about, among others, by a rapidly
aging population. There will be increasing number of chronic disease patients
as our population ages. We will be found wanting if we continue to rely on
a primary care system that focuses mainly on providing treatment for acute,
episodic diseases and ailments. A more effective response is called for. We have
to develop more proactive, continuing, integrated, and comprehensive services
at the primary care level with better co-ordination among different healthcare
providers. We also have to provide person-centred care in the context of family
and community.
3. As the first contact point of the whole healthcare system, primary care
covers a wide range of services, including health promotion, prevention of
acute and chronic diseases, health risk assessment and disease identification,
treatment and care for acute and chronic diseases, self-management support, and
supportive and palliative care for end-stage diseases or disabilities. To deliver
such a comprehensive range of services, we need to adopt a multi-disciplinary
approach involving joint input from an appropriate combination of healthcare
professionals, such as doctors, dentists, Chinese medicine practitioners, nurses,
allied health professionals and other healthcare providers in the community.
4. Throughout the years, the Government has taken steps to improve
primary care in the public system through the Department of Health (DH) and
the Hospital Authority (HA). In 2005, the Health and Medical Development
Executive Summary
ii Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Advisory Committee (HMDAC) reviewed and made recommendations on the
service delivery model for the healthcare system, including the primary care
system. Building on these recommendations, the Government put forward a
comprehensive package of proposals for reforming the healthcare system in the
Healthcare Reform Consultation Document “Your Health, Your Life” which was
published in March 2008. One of the service reform proposals is to enhance
primary care especially the provision of continuing, preventive, comprehensive
and holistic healthcare services. Specifically, the following initiatives were
proposed –
(a) developing basic models for primary care services;
(b) establishing a family doctor register;
(c) improving public primary care; and
(d) strengthening public health functions through public-private partnership.
5. In recognition of the broad support for the reform proposals received
during the first stage public consultation on healthcare reform conducted between
March and June 2008, the Chief Executive announced in the 2008-09 Policy
Address a series of policy initiatives to enhance primary care. The Government
has been increasing the amount of resources spent on primary care. Additional
resources have also been earmarked for the period 2009-10 to 2012-13 to support
primary care development. The Government will continue to provide financial
support to the long-term development of primary care, where necessary, having
regard to the overall progress of healthcare reform including supplementary
healthcare financing arrangements and the resources available for health care.
6. The Working Group on Primary Care (WGPC), chaired by the Secretary
for Food and Health, was reconvened in October 2008 to advise on strategic
directions for the development of primary care in Hong Kong. Three Task Forces
have been formed under WGPC to recommend strategies to strengthen primary
care in three areas, including primary care conceptual models and reference
frameworks, Primary Care Directory, and primary care service delivery models.
WGPC and its Task Forces comprise representatives from the public and private
Executive Summary
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document iii
Executive Summary
healthcare sectors, academia, patient groups, health administrators, and other
stakeholders.
7. Based upon the advice of WGPC and taking reference from international
experience, our major strategies to strengthen primary care in Hong Kong should
target at improving the attributes of a good primary care system, supported by
a well-equipped primary care workforce and built-in infrastructure. The major
strategies to improve primary care in Hong Kong include –
(a) Develop comprehensive care by multi-disciplinary teams: It is important
for an appropriate combination of healthcare professionals to work as a team
to provide comprehensive and whole-person care in order to meet the multifaceted needs of chronic disease patients and the elderly.
(b) Improve continuity of care for individuals: Continuity of care over
the course of a lifetime enhances effectiveness in disease prevention and
management, improves access to care, promotes patient safety and facilitates
efficient use of resources.
(c) Improve co-ordination of care among healthcare professionals across
different sectors: Improving co-ordination of care enhances continuity of
care, reduces duplications and helps patients receive optimal care based on
their needs.
(d) Strengthen preventive approach to tackle major disease burden: Chronic
diseases are taking up more and more of the capacity of our healthcare
system. They are also the major causes of death. To better tackle chronic
diseases, we need to adopt a more preventive approach. This involves a
variety of strategies, including the promotion of healthy behaviours to reduce
the risk of falling chronically ill, detection of disease at an early stage, and
better disease management to prevent complications and deterioration.
(e) Enhance inter-sectoral collaboration to improve the availability
of quality care, especially care for chronic disease patients: More
collaboration and co-ordination between the public and private healthcare
sectors are crucial for improving the availability of comprehensive and
continuing care, especially that for people with chronic health problems.
iv Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(f) Emphasise person-centred care and patient empowerment: Provision of
person-centred care and patient empowerment improves disease monitoring,
prevents complications, and results in better treatment compliance and
quality of care.
(g) Support professional development and quality improvement: A primary
care workforce with suitable professional skill-mix is needed for effective
delivery of the whole range of primary care functions. Re-orientation
towards person-centred care and collaboration among healthcare providers
across different sectors should be emphasised.
(h) Strengthen organisational and infrastructural support for the changes:
Long-term organisational support is required to foster continuous
collaboration across different sectors in formulating and implementing
recommendations on primary care development. The use of information
technology, including sharing of electronic health records, provides essential
infrastructural support for the reform process.
8. WGPC and its Task Forces formulated a set of initial recommendations on
enhancing primary care in Hong Kong in 2009. The progress to-date of the three
major areas of work is summarised below –
(a) On development of primary care conceptual models and reference
frameworks, we are finalising the conceptual models and clinical protocols
in the form of reference frameworks for hypertension and diabetes mellitus
for use as common reference by healthcare professionals.
(b) We have started the development of a Primary Care Directory in phases
with a view to promoting enhanced primary care through the family doctor
concept and a multi-disciplinary approach. It is planned to be an easily
accessible electronic database containing practice-based information of
primary care providers in the community. The first edition of the Doctor and
Dentist Sub-directories will be launched in 2010-11.
(c) We are devising feasible service models to deliver enhanced primary care
services in the community through appropriate pilot projects. These include
a series of pilot projects which aim at improving chronic disease management
Executive Summary
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document v
and trying out different models for enhancing primary care both within the
public healthcare system and through public-private partnership. We are
exploring various pilot projects on community health centres (CHC) and
networks based on different CHC-type models in consultation with the
relevant stakeholders with a view to providing more comprehensive and coordinated primary care services through cross-sectoral collaboration.
9. The Government is working with the dental professionals on initiatives
to enhance primary dental care. Additional resources have been earmarked
mainly to support the implementation of pilot projects to improve dental services
for the elderly in need and to strengthen oral health promotion. The Government
also plans to improve mental health services through strengthening support
for mental patients in the community and enhancing assessment and treatment
services in the primary care setting for patients with common mental disorders.
10. The provision of comprehensive, continuing and co-ordinated healthcare
services requires strengthened infrastructural support. To this end, the
Government has taken a leading role in developing a territory-wide patientoriented electronic health record (eHR) sharing system. Emphasis has been
placed on strengthening collaboration and sharing of information among different
sectors of healthcare providers. Development of the eHR sharing system can also
help generate epidemiological information which is important for planning of
primary care services.
11. The overall strategy for developing primary care in Hong Kong
emphasises a step-by-step and consensus building approach to reforming the
primary care system, and a virtuous cycle of pilot-evaluation-adjustment for
the continuous development and implementation of specific initiatives and
pilot projects. In this connection, resources have been earmarked to strengthen
research on primary care to facilitate the formulation of evidence-based
policies and strategies, evaluate the effectiveness of different pilot projects, and
assess the overall effectiveness of the primary care system in improving health
Executive Summary
vi Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
of the population. Findings of research and results of evaluation will guide the
further development of strategies and action plans to build up the reform process.
12. We will continue to explore the development of new service delivery
models and re-engineering of patient care pathways with a view to improving
the provision of evidence-based quality care, strengthening cross-sectoral
collaboration and promoting more efficient use of resources. There are areas
which have to be further examined, such as development of nurses and allied
health professionals as case managers, establishment of CHCs and other models
of integrated care, development of primary care workforce, and potential
improvement in long-term infrastructural support for primary care development.
13. The long-term development of primary care is an on-going process that
entails multi-partite collaboration and well co-ordinated strategies. A Primary
Care Office (PCO), which comprises staff with relevant expertise from the Food
and Health Bureau, DH and HA, was set up in DH in September 2010 to support
and co-ordinate the development of primary care in Hong Kong, particularly the
implementation and co-ordination of actions across different healthcare sectors.
14. In order to promote the on-going and evolving strategy of primary care
development to the wider community, the Government will embark on a two-year
primary care campaign targeting both healthcare professionals and the public
in 2010-11. Based on the experience learnt and evaluation of the pilot projects,
a cycle of four to five years will be adopted for a holistic review of the overall
primary care development strategy. The Government will continue to take
responsibility for co-ordinating and supporting the reform process with a view to
developing a better healthcare system and improving the health of our society.
Executive Summary
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 1
Primary care is the first point of contact for individuals and families in a
continuing healthcare processa
. A good primary care system provides the public
with access to better care which is comprehensive, holistic, co-ordinated, and as
close as possible to where people live and work. Providing preventive care as
well as quality management of diseases to everyone is important for promoting
health of the population1,2,3.
Having consulted the public in the first stage public consultation on healthcare
reform on a comprehensive package of healthcare reform proposals including
enhancing primary careb
, the Government is dedicated to embarking on
strengthening primary care as the cornerstone of our reforms.
This document –
(1) highlights why good primary care will benefit us all, especially how it will
help us address the major challenges of preventing and providing on-going
treatment for the modern day epidemic of chronic diseases; and
(2) sets out the major strategies and pathways of action which will help us
deliver high quality primary care in Hong Kong.
Our Vision of the Future Primary Care System
Our vision is to develop a primary care system in which –
(1) every citizen has access to a primary care doctor as their long-term health
partner;
(2) there is better availability of comprehensive, continuing and co-ordinated
care;
a. This document will focus more on the enhancement of the provision of primary (medical)
care which mainly refers to the provision of first contact healthcare services by doctors and other
healthcare professionals.
b. The Food and Health Bureau published the Healthcare Reform Consultation Document
“Your Health, Your Life” in March 2008 and conducted the first stage public consultation on
a comprehensive package of healthcare reform proposals including enhancing primary care,
promoting public-private partnership in healthcare, developing electronic health record sharing
system, strengthening public healthcare safety net, and introducing supplementary healthcare
financing.
Preamble
2 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(3) there is emphasis on preventing diseases and their deterioration by care
provided by multi-disciplinary teams;
(4) every person is supported in their efforts to improve and take care of their
own health; and
(5) care provided is of high quality and evidence-based, and is provided by well
trained professionals for patients in the context of family and community.
Preamble
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 3
Introduction
1.1 The World Health Organization (WHO) made a visionary declaration that
primary care was the key to “Health for All” in Alma Ata more than 30 years
ago
4
. This set the scene for international efforts to promote primary care and
formally acknowledged the pivotal role of a strong primary care system. Many
countries striving to develop or strengthen their primary care systems recognise
the key role of primary care as the foundation of effective healthcare systems.
The need to enhance primary care was once again reaffirmed in the World
Health Report 2008: “Primary Health Care: Now More Than Ever”, and was
further stressed by the 2009 World Health Assembly’s resolution on primary care
policies1,5.
1.2 The key attributes of good primary care entail the provision of accessible
first contact care that is comprehensive, continuing, co-ordinated and
person-centred in the context of family and community2,4,6,7. Primary care
contributes to the health of the population and covers a wide range of services
which includes the delivery and provision of 4,8,9,10 -
● health promotion;
● prevention of acute and chronic diseases;
● health risk assessment and disease identification;
● treatment and care for acute and chronic diseases;
● self-management support; and
● rehabilitative, supportive and palliative care for disability or end-stage
diseases.
Chapter 1. Background
4 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
2.1 Hong Kong people have been enjoying healthcare services which are of
high standards and relatively efficient, with a total health expenditure accounting
for around 5.0% of GDP11. Our life expectancies rank among the longest in
the world, and maternal and infant death rates among the lowest. Our highly
subsidised public healthcare sector offers treatment and protection to every
citizen, whereas the private sector also provides a wide range of services,
including primary care services.
2.2 Around 70% of clinic consultations are made with primary care
practitioners in the private sector, mostly paid out-of-pocket by those who can
afford the fees11,12. The public system provides primary care through out-patient
services run by the Hospital Authority (HA) targeting low-income groups, the
under-privileged, those who are chronically ill and poorer elderly patients13,14.
The Department of Health (DH) also provides primary care through its preventive
public health services, health promotional programmes and other disease
prevention and management services.
Changes and Challenges to the Existing System
2.3 Despite our accomplishments, in common with many other countries, our
healthcare system is facing major challenges1,15,16,17,18.
2.4 As the population ages, its health needs change and the services needed
also change. The increasing burden of chronic diseases, higher expectations
from increasingly health literate public and patients, and scientific developments
offering new and expensive treatments all put healthcare expenditure in our
existing system to the test.
(a) Changes in demographic trends
● Our population continues to grow and become older. The population is
projected to expand from 7.00 million in 2009 to 8.89 million in 2039. The
proportion of those aged 65 years or above will double from 12.7% (0.89
million) in 2009 to 28.0% (2.49 million) in 203919,20.
Chapter 2. Primary Care in Hong Kong
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 5
● The elderly population has much greater healthcare needs. For instance, a
person aged 65 years or above uses on average six times more in-patient care
(in terms of bed-days) than a person aged below 65 years21.
● The healthcare needs of a rapidly growing number of older people will
present challenges in managing chronic diseases over longer periods as well
as keeping them healthy and active in the community whilst providing high
quality end-of-life care22.

(b) Changes in disease pattern
● The epidemic of chronic non-communicable diseases is sweeping the
world23,24. Locally, about two-thirds of deaths are attributable to chronic
diseases such as hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus and chronic
respiratory problems12,25. Such diseases are directly related to less healthy
lifestyles including obesity, lack of exercise, eating high fat foods and
smoking23,24. Chronic diseases and the associated complications are amongst
the major causes for hospitalisation and long-term care24,26.
(c) Higher public and consumer expectations
● Increased access to health information, including the improved use
of information technology, promotes health literacy as well as better
understanding of the nature and management of disease among patients and
the public1,15. This in turn may lead to a rise in expectations on the availability
of more advanced treatment and demand for choices of a wider range of
services.
(d) Inflating healthcare expenditure
● Ageing population, growing burden of chronic diseases and associated
disabilities, advancement in medical technologies and inflation in healthcare
prices all lead to pressure to expand the range of healthcare services. This
trend is evident both locally and in most other advanced economies1,11,27.
Chapter 2. Primary Care in Hong Kong
6 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
The Need to Enhance Primary Care
2.5 The challenges we are facing, especially the growing number of elderly
people and people with chronic diseases and functional needs, create an urgent
need to build up more proactive, integrated and comprehensive services at
community level to support disease prevention and management, maintenance of
functional status and improvement in quality of life. The traditional focus of our
primary care system has been on providing treatment for acute, episodic diseases
and ailments without sufficient emphasis on prevention. This can no longer meet
the changing needs of the population. Over-reliance on hospital and specialist
care for management of common chronic diseases results in long waiting time for
public specialist referrals and overloading in public hospitals.
2.6 To strengthen the prevention and management of chronic diseases and
support care of the elderly, we need a stronger primary care system which
involves re-orientation towards the provision of more comprehensive communitybased care emphasising continuity and collaboration among healthcare
professionals across different sectors.
2.7 Evidence demonstrates that health systems that rely more on primary care
in comparison with systems based on specialist care produce better population
health outcomes, reduce the rate of avoidable mortality, improve continuity and
access to healthcare, result in higher patient satisfaction, and reduce health-related
disparities at a lower overall cost for healthcare28,29,30,31. Studies comparing
services that could be delivered as either primary care or specialist care services
show that services provided through the primary care system are more costeffective32.
● International comparison also shows that countries with more primary care
doctors acting as co-ordinators for referral to specialist and hospital care are
more likely to have better health outcomes, lower health costs and greater
patient satisfaction1,33,34,35.
Chapter 2. Primary Care in Hong Kong
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 7
● Many countries reforming their health systems are doing so by strengthening
community-based primary care, focusing on prevention and quality
improvement in disease management1,36,37,38.
Multi-disciplinary Primary Care Providers
2.8 The majority of the first contact primary care services in Hong Kong are
provided by western medicine trained doctors including general practitioners
and other specialists12. A significant proportion of the primary care services
are provided by other providers including Chinese medicine practitioners and
dentists. Other primary care professionals also include nurses, chiropractors,
physiotherapists, occupational therapists, clinical psychologists, dietitians,
pharmacists, optometrists, speech therapists, podiatrists, and other healthcare
providers in the community. Evidence shows that quality care is best provided by
teams of health workers with different skills working closely with the community
and hospitals31,35,39. This enables the right skills to be provided to meet the needs
of individual patients for more comprehensive, continuing and co-ordinated care.
Box 1. What do patients and the public think about primary care and
the need to change?
Improving primary care is not a new idea in Hong Kong yet many Hong
Kong people are not familiar with the principles of family medicine or the
attributes of good primary care40. However, recent studies commissioned
by the Government provide us with new perspectives and a better
understanding of people’s beliefs about primary care41,42,43,44. The main
findings are as follows –
Chapter 2. Primary Care in Hong Kong
8 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● Given sufficient explanation, the public were quite receptive to the idea
of provision of good primary care and appreciated the principles of
family medicine, including continuity of care, more comprehensive and
preventive approach, and sharing of health records among providers.
● Two-thirds of the respondents reported having a “regular primary care
doctor” to whom one would first consult when needed; and one-third
reported having a “regular family doctor” to whom one would consult
for all kinds of health problems.
● People with a family doctor considered it a good model but those
without a family doctor considered it as a “luxury item” for those who
could afford to pay.
● Many patients suffering from chronic disease would prefer to be
followed up in the public healthcare system, even if they had a regular
private family doctor. Reasons include feeling secure about the fixed
and lower cost of treatment, consideration about quality and continuity
of care, standard of training of doctors, ease of access to specialists
and supporting services available within the general out-patient clinic
(GOPC) system.
● Having a family doctor was associated with less use of accident and
emergency services, receiving more preventive care and better patient
enablement.
● These studies also showed that doctors who had family medicine
training were more involved in chronic disease care than those without,
and having professional training in family medicine was associated with
better process and outcome of care.
Chapter 2. Primary Care in Hong Kong
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 9
3.1 Detailed examination of the primary care system in Hong Kong and
recommended strategies for enhancing and reforming primary care can be dated
back to the Report of the Working Party on Primary Health Care titled “Health
for All – The Way Ahead” issued in 199045. The call for strengthening primary
care was also included in the other healthcare reform consultation documents that
followed16,17,46.
3.2 Since 1990, the Government has taken steps to improve primary care in
the public system through DH and HA. Some examples are listed below –
(a) Community health promotion and disease prevention services for population
sub-groups have been strengthened through services under DH –
● The Women Health Service was established in 1994 to provide centrebased service for promoting health of women aged 64 years or below.
● The Student Health Service was set up in 1995 to provide centre-based
preventive and health promotion services to primary school and secondary
school students. School-based health education programmes are also
provided through outreach teams.
● The Elderly Health Service started service in 1998 to provide centrebased primary care services for the elderly, embracing a more preventive
and multi-disciplinary approach. Its outreach teams also support elderly
centres and elderly homes on disease prevention and health promotion.
● From 2000 to 2007, the Maternal and Child Health Centres, based on
scientific evidence and best practices, have thoroughly overhauled their
child health promotion and disease prevention programmes for children
aged zero to five years and their families.
(b) Prevention and control of infectious diseases and chronic diseases have been
strengthened through the establishment of the Centre for Health Protection
under DH in 2004.
(c) DH has further strengthened health promotion in the community by the
introduction of programmes that involve stronger inter-sectoral approaches.
Supported by the Government, Healthy City Projects are in place in many
districts to foster joint efforts to improve community engagement in health
promotion.
Chapter 3. Primary Care Development: Progress To-date
10 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(d) The management of GOPCs was transferred from DH to HA in 2003 to
improve integration between primary and secondary levels of care in the
public system. Professional training for family medicine specialists is
strengthened and streamlined. A multi-disciplinary approach of care is
adopted and chronic disease management and patient empowerment are
enhanced.
(e) HA has expanded its Community Nursing Service (CNS) to provide more
comprehensive care and patient support, especially for the elderly and
patients with chronic health conditions.
(f) HA has been working closely with many non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) to enhance care of the elderly and chronic disease patients living in
the community, especially with the establishment of the Community Geriatric
Assessment Teams and various community networks.
(g) Fourteen public Chinese medicine out-patient clinics that involve tripartite
collaboration among HA, NGOs and local universities have been set up since
2003 to promote the development of evidence-based Chinese medicine and to
provide training opportunities for local Chinese medicine degree programme
graduates.
(h) Preventive and promotive oral healthcare services to the public are
strengthened and improved through the School Dental Care Service (SDCS)
and the Oral Health Education Unit (OHEU) of DH.
Recent progress
3.3 In 2005, the Health and Medical Development Advisory Committee
(HMDAC) reviewed the service delivery model for the healthcare system,
covering primary, secondary, tertiary and specialised services; elderly, longterm and rehabilitation care services; integration between the public and private
sectors; and infrastructural support. In its discussion paper “Building a Healthy
Tomorrow” issued in July 2005, HMDAC set out, inter alia, the vision and ways
of improvement needed for building up a robust primary care system in Hong
Kong17. The discussion paper made a number of recommendations, including the
following on primary care –
Chapter 3. Primary Care Development: Progress To-date
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 11
(a) promoting the family doctor concept which emphasises continuing,
comprehensive and holistic care;
(b) putting greater emphasis on prevention of diseases through public education
and through family doctors; and
(c) encouraging and facilitating medical professionals to collaborate with other
professionals to provide co-ordinated services.
3.4 Building on the recommendations of HMDAC, the Government put
forward a comprehensive package of interrelated proposals for reforming the
healthcare system in the Healthcare Reform Consultation Document “Your Health,
Your Life” issued in March 200847. Emphasis was placed on enhancing primary
care especially the provision of continuing, preventive, comprehensive and
holistic healthcare services. Initiatives were proposed to, among other things, –
(a) develop basic models for primary care services;
(b) establish a family doctor register;
(c) subsidise individuals for preventive care;
(d) improve public primary care; and
(e) strengthen public health functions.
3.5 Many constructive views from a wide range of respondents were received
and the responses confirmed a broad-based support for reforming the existing
healthcare system48. The principles of good primary care as stipulated in “Your
Health, Your Life” received wide and positive feedback from both the public and
stakeholders in the healthcare sector (Please refer to Annex A for details).
3.6 In recognition of the broad support for the reform proposals, the Chief
Executive announced in the 2008-09 Policy Address a series of policy initiatives
to enhance primary care, including strengthening support for chronic disease
patients at primary care level. These initiatives were further reinforced in
the 2009-10 Policy Agenda and 2010-11 Policy Agenda. To demonstrate the
Government’s commitment in improving primary care, resources have been
earmarked for the period 2009-10 to 2012-13 to back up these reform initiatives.
Chapter 3. Primary Care Development: Progress To-date
12 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
3.7 The Government has been increasing the amount of resources spent on
primary care services in the past few years. An additional funding of more than
$4.1 billion has been allocated and earmarked for primary care and public-private
partnership in healthcare since 2008-09. The Government will continue to
provide financial support to the long-term task of developing primary care, where
necessary, having regard to the overall progress of healthcare reform including
supplementary healthcare financing arrangements and the resources available for
healthcare.
The Working Group on Primary Care and Task Forces
3.8 The Working Group on Primary Care (WGPC), chaired by the
Secretary for Food and Health, was reconvened in October 2008 to advise
on strategic directions for the development of primary care in Hong Kong.
Three Task Forces have been formed under WGPC to recommend strategies
to strengthen primary care in three areas, including developing primary
care models and protocols to be adopted, developing a Primary Care
Directory, and exploring ways to enhance primary care in Hong Kong
through appropriate service delivery models (Box 2). WGPC and its Task
Forces comprise representatives from the public and private healthcare sectors,
academia, patient groups, health administrators, healthcare professionals of
various disciplines and specialties, and other stakeholders (Details listed in Annex
B).
Chapter 3. Primary Care Development: Progress To-date
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 13
Box 2. Three Task Forces established under WGPC and their main
tasks –
● Task Force on Conceptual Model and Preventive Protocols:
To define WHAT areas of services should be developed and what models
could be used to enhance primary care to meet the needs of different
patients and different age groups; and to develop protocols on management
of major diseases and preventive care for different population groups.
● Task Force on Primary Care Directory:
To develop a Primary Care Directory to provide primary care professionals’
background and practice information so that the public can choose providers
WHO are suitable for them; to facilitate the co-ordination of multidisciplinary teams to provide more comprehensive services; and to make
use of the Directory as a platform to support professional development and
quality care.
● Task Force on Primary Care Delivery Models:
To study HOW to put the concepts, basic models and protocols into action,
drawing input from a multi-disciplinary workforce; and to examine the
principles governing the delivery of better primary care and the respective
roles of different healthcare professionals in the public, private and nonprofit making sectors for the provision of better co-ordinated care.
3.9 After more than one year of discussion as well as review of local and
international experience and evidence, WGPC and its Task Forces have made a
number of initial recommendations in 2009 on enhancing primary care in Hong
Kong, which are described in Chapter 5.
Chapter 3. Primary Care Development: Progress To-date
14 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
4.1 Based upon the advice of WGPC and taking reference from international
experience, the major strategies to strengthen primary care in Hong Kong
should target at improvements to realise the attributes of a good primary
care system, supported by a well-equipped primary care workforce and
built-in infrastructure (Box 3).
Box 3. To improve primary care in Hong Kong, we need to –
(1) Develop comprehensive care by multi-disciplinary teams
(2) Improve continuity of care for individuals
(3) Improve co-ordination of care among healthcare professionals across
different sectors
(4) Strengthen preventive approach to tackle major disease burden
(5) Enhance inter-sectoral collaboration to improve the availability of
quality care, especially care for chronic disease patients
(6) Emphasise person-centred care and patient empowerment
(7) Support professional development and quality improvement
(8) Strengthen organisational and infrastructural support for the changes
(A) Comprehensive Care by Multi-disciplinary Teams
4.2 The provision of comprehensive and whole-person care is one of the core
principles of family medicine and quality primary care. It is increasingly difficult
for healthcare systems to remain responsive to the rapidly expanding needs of
chronic disease patients and the elderly without establishing a continuum of
comprehensive care provided by different healthcare professionals working
closely with the patients49,50,51. Studies show that collaborative care provided by
multi-disciplinary teams of providers improves health outcomes and provides
more appropriate support to patients in the community22,29,52,53.
● Team of primary care providers – In Hong Kong, a wide range of
healthcare providers are providing first contact healthcare. The majority
of our population choose to consult western medicine doctors when health
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 15
problems arise. A significant proportion of primary care services are also
directly provided by Chinese medicine practitioners and dentists12. Other
healthcare professionals like nurses, chiropractors, allied health professionals,
pharmacists are also providing services on disease management and health
promotion in the community.
● Teamwork is needed for the provision of more co-ordinated and
comprehensive care, especially for the proactive management of chronic
diseases. For instance, diabetic patients often require dietary advice, and
patients with chronic respiratory diseases may need physiotherapists and
occupational therapists to help them build up their respiratory function and
adjust to daily activities.
● Community multi-disciplinary care is increasingly emphasised as appropriate
and efficient. Nursing and allied health advice is of particular value in
supporting patients with progressive or complex long-term conditions for
a healthier and more independent life, reducing institutionalised care and
improving quality of life54,55,56,57.
● In the private sector, doctor consultations are more readily available than
nursing care and allied health services. Most of our nursing and allied health
professionals are providing services in the public system or NGOs, where
multi-disciplinary care is more readily accessible than in the private sector.
The challenge is to make such services accessible to those who need them,
irrespective of where they seek primary care.
(B) Continuity of Care for Individuals
4.3 Continuity over the course of a lifetime is an indispensable pillar for
quality healthcare. It enhances effectiveness, especially in chronic disease
management, elderly care and maternal and child care. Better continuity of care
improves access to care, reduces re-hospitalisation, consultations with specialists
and emergency services, and enables better detection of adverse effects of
medical interventions1,58.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
16 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
4.4 Continuity of healthcare involves59 –
● relationship continuity: an on-going therapeutic relationship between a
patient and one or more healthcare providers;
● information continuity: the use of information on past medical history and
personal circumstances to make current care appropriate for each individual;
and
● management continuity: a consistent and coherent approach to the
management of a health condition that is responsive to a patient’s changing
needs.
Box 4. Continuity of healthcare: different perspectives
● From the patient’s perspective, continuity of care mainly entails the
experience of a “continuous caring relationship” with an identified
healthcare professional60. It helps healthcare providers gain their
patients’ confidence. It also helps them become better co-ordinators of
patients’ health services and more effective in providing holistic care
and promoting health61.
● From the provider’s perspective, the modern healthcare system is
more likely to focus on the continuity in management, and the delivery
of “seamless service” through integration, co-ordination of care plan
and sharing of information among providers. These are also important
for improving health outcomes58,62.
4.5 In Hong Kong, maintaining continuity of care is a major challenge because –
● The development of specialty services and multi-disciplinary care make it
increasingly common for patients to be seen by an array of providers in a
wide variety of settings.
● “Doctor-shopping” is a fairly common phenomenon18. Despite this, a local
survey showed that many people reported that they would consult a regular
primary care doctor for most of their health problems41.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 17
● Although HA has developed wider networks for sharing of electronic records
within the organisation and there are pilot projects on sharing of patient health
records between HA and the private sector, sharing of patient records and
management plans across sectors needs further development.
(C) Co-ordination of Care among Healthcare Professionals
across Different Sectors
4.6 Improving co-ordination of care is one important step in healthcare reform
to enhance quality of care and efficient use of resources. Better co-ordinated care
improves continuity of care, reduces duplication and helps patients receive the
optimal care based on their needs1,63,64,65. In Hong Kong, the compartmentalised
healthcare system is not conducive to co-ordination of care16. Breaking down
existing barriers to enable the provision of more co-ordinated and integrated care
would help improve the quality of our primary care services.
4.7 It is not easy for patients to navigate through our complex and divergent
system for more suitable care, especially for chronic disease patients and the
elderly who are more likely to have multiple contacts with various providers.
Primary care doctors and multi-disciplinary teams of primary care professionals
who provide longitudinal care and are familiar with the patients are their best
partners and care co-ordinators to help them choose and access various
services based on their needs.
(D) Preventive Approach to Tackle Major Disease Burden,
Especially Chronic Diseases
4.8 The challenges of an ageing population and an increasing number of
people living with chronic diseases place heavy demand on our healthcare
system47,66. Many of the costly and disabling chronic health problems, such as
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, chronic respiratory diseases and some
cancers, are closely related to modifiable behavioural risk factors such as
unhealthy diet, physical inactivity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol24,67,68.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
18 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● Chronic diseases account for about two-thirds of total deaths in Hong Kong69.
● It is estimated that 27% of people aged 15 years or above are suffering from
hypertension (HT)25, and about one-tenth of the adult population have diabetes
mellitus (DM)70.
● For the health of the whole population, we need to reduce people’s risk of
becoming chronic disease patients, and to prevent disease deterioration and
complications for people who already have chronic diseases. This involves
a variety of strategies across the community, including the promotion
of healthy behaviours to reduce the risk of diseases, early detection
of chronic diseases, and provision of high quality management with
the ultimate goal to reduce the incidence of complications and associated
morbidities and mortality10,71,72. Evidence about effective interventions shows
that we can achieve these goals35,73,74,75.
Box 5. Population and individual approaches in disease prevention
● Effective prevention of chronic diseases involves integrating public
health principles of population risk reduction with patient-centred
primary care5,30.
● Both population-wide and high-risk individual approaches are
important and complementary in chronic disease prevention. They
should be integrated as a comprehensive strategy that serves the needs
of the entire population and has an impact at the individual, community
and national levels67,76. For example, controlling tobacco use calls for
smoke-free legislation, public education and smoking cessation services
provided to individuals.
● Population approach aims to reduce the risks throughout the entire
population and addresses the causes of chronic diseases. A small
shift in the average population levels of several risk factors can lead
to a large reduction in chronic disease burden77,78,79,80,81. For example,
promoting healthy diet and physical activity among the population
could successfully reduce the overall risk of developing cardiovascular
diseases82.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 19
● Individual-based approach for interventions of higher risk
individuals (e.g. people with obesity, older people and people with
predisposing health conditions) has been shown to be effective in
reducing the incidence of diseases like DM and heart diseases, delaying
disease onset and reducing complications83,84.
(E) Inter-sectoral Collaboration to Improve the Availability
of Quality Care, Especially Care for Chronic Disease Patients
4.9 Accessibility to healthcare and availability of services when needed are the
two key attributes of a good healthcare system that enables equity of care1,85,86,87,88.
Good accessibility involves the provision of care that is physically accessible,
available, affordable and culturally appropriate89,90.
● In Hong Kong, primary care services are geographically accessible to the
vast majority of the population.
● The public healthcare sector provides a wide range of highly subsidised
primary care services available at very low fee targeting the low income and
under-privileged groups. However, the heavy reliance on the public system
for chronic disease management and health services for elders results in
overcrowding and long queues for care.
● Services in the private healthcare sector are widely and directly accessible
to people who can afford to pay. Service fees are affordable to most of the
population but people are more willing to pay for episodic curative care
by doctors than preventive and other supporting care by the rest of the
professions.
● The private primary care providers can be more actively engaged
especially in the provision of care for chronic disease patients alongside
the public sector. More collaboration and co-ordination between the public
and private sectors are imperative to broaden the availability of more
comprehensive and continuing care, especially care for people with chronic
health problems. Besides financial hurdles, system barriers within and across
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
20 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
sectors, such as mutual communication and sharing of patient records, need to
be managed for better public-private partnership.
● Access to information on health and healthcare services: Knowledge of
disease management and understanding of available services are important
for the access to appropriate and timely healthcare. Insufficient information
on costs and effectiveness of care provided by the private market makes it
difficult for patients to estimate their affordability and make informed choices,
and has been shown to be one of the deterring factors for people to have
access to the private sector.
(F) Person-centred Care and Patient Empowerment
4.10 Person-centred care and patient empowerment are imperative for effective
disease prevention and control4,8,91. Person-centred care aims at improving
health literacy as well as strengthening individual participation and patient
empowerment in health promotion and better management of diseases92,93,94.
Primary care professionals have key roles to play in supporting person-centred
care in the community.
Person-centred care
4.11 Person-centred care involves1,92,95,96,97,98 –
● embracing an approach to care that consciously adopts the patient’s
perspectives, taking into consideration one’s social, cultural and psychological
background;
● building partnerships and making collaborative efforts among the patient, his/
her family and providers to support decision making and management;
● integrating prevention and health promotion with treatment;
● improving health literacy and accessibility to health information; and
● supporting patient empowerment and enhancing self-management capacity.
4.12 Strengthening person-centred care improves disease monitoring, prevents
complications, as well as enhances treatment compliance, quality of care, patient
satisfaction, self-efficacy and quality of life1,99,100.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 21
Patient empowerment
4.13 Empowerment in health is a process through which people gain greater
control over decisions and actions affecting their health101.
● Patient empowerment goes beyond the mere attainment of knowledge. It aims
to help patients understand their diseases and health needs, build confidence,
develop skills in self-management, strengthen linkages for support within the
community and the healthcare system, and develop household capacity to stay
healthy and to make healthy decisions102,103.
● Empowering patients to participate actively in their disease management can
improve care and health outcomes, especially for people with chronic diseases
and other long-term conditions104,105,106,107.
(G) Professional Development and Quality Improvement
4.14 A strong and well-trained healthcare workforce is critical for the
sustainable development of our health services. A well-trained primary care
workforce with suitable professional skill-mix working together in collaboration
is needed for effective delivery of the whole range of primary care functions49,50.
Re-orientation of training towards person-centred care and provision of multidisciplinary primary care in the community is also needed (Box 6).
Box 6. Preparing a Healthcare Workforce for the 21st Century (WHO)108
Education and training of healthcare professionals usually place emphasis
on understanding disease patho-physiology, diagnosis and treatment. To
meet the increasing needs of person-centred care and emphasis on health
promotion, the WHO supports development of the healthcare workforce to
improve healthcare service delivery through five basic competencies which
are applicable to all members of the workforce -
(a) Patient-centred care: possess effective communication skills, support
patient education and self-management using a proactive approach
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
22 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(b) Partnering: create and maintain effective partnership with patients and
other providers in all levels of healthcare and the community
(c) Quality improvement: participate in care delivery and outcome
monitoring, learn and adapt to changes in organisations and systems,
and possess knowledge and skills to integrate scientific evidence and
standards into practice
(d) Information and communication technology: attain the ability to
use information and communication technology to support and monitor
patient care
(e) Public health perspectives: Acquire the competency to provide public
health functions including health promotion and preventive activities,
incorporate system thinking, and work in a primary care-led system
(H) Organisational and Infrastructural Support
4.15 Primary care reform is a long-term and on-going process which requires
coherent changes in the healthcare system with continuous improvement across a
wide scope of areas beyond the capacity of any single agency or the sole effort of
the Government1,15,109.
The need for organisational support
4.16 We need to foster continuous collaborative efforts between many partners
in both the public and private sectors, including the healthcare professions,
patient representatives, academia, policy makers, relevant Government
departments (e.g. the Social Welfare Department responsible for social services
and elderly support), and other key stakeholders in formulating and implementing
recommendations for the development of primary care.
● A dedicated organisational set-up is required to provide on-going support and
co-ordinate multi-partite efforts for the implementation of the recommended
strategies, with a view to raising standards and quality of primary care
services across sectors.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 23
● The Government would take the lead in setting up and support the functioning
of the long-term organisational structure in support of primary care
development.
Infrastructural support: health record sharing
4.17 The use of modern information technology and sharing of patient health
records among healthcare providers play an important role in the reform process.
● Effective sharing of health records and disease management plans across
healthcare providers from different sectors through electronic systems can
improve continuity, co-ordination and communication for better patient
care; improve patient safety; and facilitate the monitoring and evaluation
of service delivery and provision of more patient-centred integrated
management1,110,111,112,113.
● Health information systems can also provide platforms to strengthen
professional training and experience sharing among different providers,
and help generate useful epidemiological information for health
policymakers114,115,116.
Taking forward the directions of primary care development
4.18 A number of initiatives and pilot projects are being or will be carried
out with a view to developing good primary care based on the eight strategies
discussed above. They are summarised in Table 1, and will be discussed in
further details in the following Chapters.
Chapter 4. Developing Primary Care: Key Strategies
24 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document Initiatives and pilot projects to enhance primary care Strategies to Enhance Develop multi- disciplinary and comprehensive primary care Improve continuity of care Improve co-ordination of care Development of Conceptual models and reference frameworks    Primary Care Directory    Pilot projects to improve chronic disease management   
Community health
centres and networks
  
Primary dental care 
Community mental
healthcare
 
Electronic health
record (eHR) sharing
system
  
Strengthening primary
care-related research

Establishment of the
Primary Care Office
  
Primary Care in Hong Kong
Strengthen
preventive
approach to tackle
major disease
burden, especially
chronic diseases
Further
enhance
availability
of care for
chronic disease
patients
Enhance
personcentred care
and patient
empowerment
Support
professional
development
and quality
improvement
Support
professional
development
and quality
improvement
  
   
   
   
  
 
    
  
  
Table 1. Strategies for developing primary care in Hong Kong and initiatives and
pilot projects being or will be carried out
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 25
5.1 WGPC and its Task Forces formulated a set of initial recommendations
in 2009 for the development of better primary care services in Hong Kong
through the following –
(a) developing primary care conceptual models and clinical protocols, especially
for the prevention and management of common chronic diseases, with a view
to guiding the provision of enhanced primary care;
(b) setting up a Primary Care Directory with a view to promoting enhanced
primary care through the family doctor concept and adopting a multidisciplinary approach; and
(c) devising feasible service models to deliver enhanced primary care services in
the community through pilot projects as appropriate, including the setting up
of community health centres.
(A) Development and Promotion of Conceptual Models and
Reference Frameworks for Tackling Major Chronic Diseases
5.2 Common chronic diseases can be effectively managed by primary care
services adopting a preventive approach73,117,118,119. Experience from many
developed countries shows that sharing population-based common clinical
management models and protocols among healthcare providers in different
settings facilitates co-ordination of care, strengthens management continuity,
promotes evidence-based practice and improves patient care120,121,122.
5.3 WGPC and the Task Force on Conceptual Model and Preventive
Protocols under it have recommended the development of conceptual models and
management protocols in the form of reference frameworks for major chronic
diseases, starting with the commonest conditions, namely HT (high blood
pressure) and DM.
● HT and DM are global health challenges which bring a huge public health
burden and are leading causes of deaths24,123,124. Despite their high and rapidly
growing prevalence, HT and DM often remain unidentified in many people
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on
 Primary Care and its Task Forces
26 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
suffering from the diseases, and the conditions are also poorly controlled in
many diagnosed patients125,126.
● WHO and many international health authorities have proposed initiatives
to prevent and manage HT and DM, highlighting the role of primary
care73,127,128,129,130.
● In Hong Kong, previous surveys showed that more than one-quarter of the
population aged 15 years or above suffered from HT, and about one-tenth of
the adult population had DM70.
Objectives of developing conceptual models and reference frameworks for
tackling HT and DM
5.4 The conceptual models and reference frameworks on HT and DM
produced by WGPC aim to –
(a) provide common reference to guide and co-ordinate efforts of healthcare
professionals across different sectors in Hong Kong for the provision of
continuing, comprehensive and evidence-based care for HT and DM in the
community;
(b) empower patients and their carers; and
(c) raise the public’s awareness on the importance of preventing and properly
managing these major chronic diseases.
Conceptual models for chronic disease prevention and management
5.5 The model proposed is based on partnering of different healthcare
professionals who work together, engaging patients, and interfacing with the
community and other sectors (Figure 1).
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 27
Figure 1. Conceptual model for chronic disease prevention and management
based on needs and risks across the life-course
Reference frameworks for tackling HT and DM
5.6 Internationally, guidelines are widely used as reference in health systems
to define best practice, transfer evidence-based knowledge into actions for better
quality and safety of care, and to provide common grounds for concerted inputs
for the prevention and control of diseases, including HT and DM76,131,132,133,134,135.
Collaboration with stakeholders is essential for effective development,
dissemination and implementation of reference frameworks on disease
management136,137,138.
Promoting the use of primary care models and reference frameworks
5.7 The views and support from key healthcare stakeholders, including
experts in the field, representatives of various healthcare professionals and patient
groups, have been very important as part of the process for developing reference
frameworks in Hong Kong. Strategies for promoting the reference frameworks
to the public, patients and healthcare professionals are being developed.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Multi-disciplinary Teams + Local Communities +
Other Levels of Healthcare + Non-healthcare Sectors
Childhood
and
Adolescence
Fetal stage
and Infancy
Adulthood
(early adulthood,
middle aged)
Elderly
Strategies for
Different Stages
Across the Life Span
Primary
prevention,
Lifestyle
modification
Diet, Physical
activity, Tobacco
control, Alcohol
and Substance
Abuse, Stress
Age-specific
issues. e.g.
personal care,
work-related
problems
Early
detection &
management
of risk factors
or diseases
Action based
on individual’s
risk profile
Evidence-based,
quality care &
management in all
clinical settings and the
community
Continuity of care
Proactive approach
Self-management
Carer support
Support quality of life
(QOL)
Rick factor
identification
& Screening
Care of
complications
&
Rehabilitation
Treatment
28 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Evaluation and long-term development
5.8 Evaluation will be carried out to assess the development, implementation,
dissemination and effectiveness of the reference frameworks for common health
problems in improving primary care and patient outcomes. WGPC will review
the reference frameworks on HT and DM over time through seeking clinical
support so that the latest medical developments and evidence are reflected in the
updated guidelines.
5.9 WGPC and its Task Force will develop conceptual models and preventive
reference frameworks for the elderly and children, as well as continue to develop
conceptual models and management/ preventive reference frameworks for
other major diseases or age group-specific health problems. These models and
frameworks will form the basis to guide initiatives to enhance primary care.
(B) Development of a Primary Care Directory
5.10 The development of a Primary Care Directory (“the Directory”;
previously called a “family doctor register”) is proposed as part of the healthcare
reform on primary care development to promote the family doctor concept.
To take forward the task, WGPC and under it the Task Force on Primary Care
Directory have made recommendations on the objectives, scope and detailed
arrangement for establishing the Directory, including its entry and maintenance
requirements.
Objectives
5.11 The establishment of the Primary Care Directory aims to -
(a) provide the public and healthcare service providers an easily accessible
electronic database containing practice-based information of primary care
professionals of various disciplines in the community;
(b) foster partnership between individuals and primary care practitioners as
health co-ordinators; and
(c) facilitate the co-ordination among different primary care providers
functioning as multi-disciplinary teams.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 29
Multi-disciplinary team-based approach
5.12 Multi-disciplinary approach with joint input from the appropriate primary
care disciplines is central to the provision of more comprehensive primary care to
meet the multi-faceted health needs.
5.13 The Directory will consist of sub-directories for different healthcare
professionals providing primary care in the community, including western
medicine doctors (doctors), dentists, Chinese medicine practitioners, nurses, allied
health professionals and other healthcare service providers in the community.
Phased development of the Primary Care Directory
5.14 Primary care providers will be grouped according to their professionals
into different sub-directories.
● Taking into consideration the existing scope of practice and maturity for
development, the Directory is being developed in phases. We will first
establish the sub-directories of doctors and dentists. The first edition of the
Directory is planned to be launched in 2010-11.
● Sub-directories of other professionals will be developed based on similar
principles for the sub-directories of doctors and dentists, with appropriate
modifications where necessary.
Information and structure of the Directory
5.15 The Directory would include background, professional qualification
and practice information that helps the public identify the appropriate primary
care providers.
5.16 To facilitate updating and searching, a web-based electronic version
of the Directory will be developed. Linkage among different healthcare
professionals will be considered so that members of the same primary care team
can be easily identified.
5.17 In the light of difficulties in keeping the Directory up-to-date and to
avoid unnecessary printing, hardcopy of the full Directory will not be produced.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
30 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Instead, printer-friendly function will be available. Searching functions will be
incorporated so that users can search by name, profession, location of practice,
service hours, etc.
5.18 The Directory will be linked to the territory-wide electronic health record
(eHR) sharing system and electronic platforms for various Government subsidised
healthcare schemes with a view to facilitating one-stop access by primary care
practitioners and ensuring coherence in the informatics infrastructure for the
healthcare system.
5.19 To enable the public to have a better understanding of the healthcare
workforce, the professional roles and functions of different disciplines will be
briefly introduced in the Directory. Information on the training and assessment
requirements for attaining different categories of postgraduate quotable
professional qualifications will also be included in the Directory.
5.20 The Directory can serve as a common platform to facilitate patient
education and empowerment. It will be linked to health information and
management protocols for common diseases, including the protocols developed
by WGPC, and other health educational websites. Strategies are being developed
to promote the professionals’ participation in the Directory and to increase the
public’s awareness and utilisation.
Criteria for entering and remaining in the Doctor and Dentist
sub-directories at the initial stage of development of the
Directory
Entry requirements
5.21 Primary care is provided by a wide range of healthcare providers. For
instance, doctors providing primary care in the community include general
practitioners, specialists in family medicine and other specialists such as
paediatricians, physicians and geriatricians. Entry requirements for the Directory
will adopt a more inclusive approach at the initial stage in order to encourage
wider engagement in enhancing primary care.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 31
5.22 Initially, registered doctors and dentists who commit themselves to the
provision of directly accessible, comprehensive, continuing and co-ordinated
person-centred primary healthcare/ dental care services will be eligible for
listing in the Directory, irrespective of their specialties or years of experience
of practices. Future upgrading of entry requirements will be considered in the
light of professional development of the primary care workforce to continue to
improve the standards of primary care.
Maintenance requirements
5.23 Maintenance requirements will be set to uphold and improve the quality
of services provided by primary care practitioners listed in the Directory. For
example, certification of continuing medical education (CME) for doctors or
continuing professional development (CPD) for dentists will be required.
5.24 To strengthen primary care-related training, additional conditions on
CME or CPD requirement for doctors or dentists to remain in the Directory will
be considered, for example,. a certain proportion of the minimal CME or CPD
requirement should be specifically related to primary care.
Facilitating professional development
5.25 With the appropriate structure and scope of information, supported by
shared health records and the appropriate incentives, the Directory can serve as
a starting point for promoting the family doctor concept and incentivising the
provision of quality primary care in the community.
● We are discussing with healthcare professionals the requirements for
healthcare professionals to be included and continue to be listed in the
Directory in respect of their professional qualifications, experience and
training received, and the long-term development of the Directory.
● We will continue to work with the healthcare professionals, academia and
relevant stakeholders to explore the enhancement in professional requirements
for entering and remaining in the Directory in the future, and discuss other
issues such as training and manpower development of primary care providers.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
32 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(C) Community Health Centres
5.26 One of the policy initiatives on enhancing primary care announced in
the 2008-09 Policy Address was to explore the concept of “Community Health
Centre” (CHC). Located in the community, CHCs aims to offer the public with
one-stop, better co-ordinated, and more comprehensive primary care services.
The idea of setting up CHCs and CHC-like networks, staffed by healthcare
professionals from different disciplines working together in the community as a
team, has been discussed by WGPC and its Task Forces.
5.27 CHCs or “polyclinics” have been established in various forms in
many countries as means to enhance primary care and community support,
and have been shown to improve care and health outcomes by improving
comprehensiveness, co-ordination and availability of care39,139,140,141,142,143.
● The CHCs usually involve models of services with different healthcare
professionals working together under the same roof or in networks in the
community to provide one-stop, wider range of services (Figure 2).
● Enhanced health promotion and improvement of inter-disciplinary
collaboration are often highlighted.
Figure 2. Community Health Centres (CHCs)/ CHC-like networks
(Diagram adapted from: “Healthcare for London 2007”139)
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
H
A Network Co-locate Hospital -
linked
Existing GPs link to
a local ‘hub’ for
specialist services,
tests, scanning etc.
GPs and other
health-care
professionals
working in the
community but also
based at the ‘front
door’ of local
hospitals
GP practices
come under one
roof, sharing
services but run
as different
practices.
GPs merge into
one large
practice, link
with other
services not on
the same site
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 33
CHC pilot projects
5.28 The Government is planning various CHC pilot projects that aim to
foster the provision of more comprehensive one-stop primary care services
through CHC-type models. These CHC pilot projects may involve re-structuring
existing health facilities currently accommodating various primary care services,
developing new health facilities in newly developed or redeveloped areas, or
creating networks among different primary care providers of close proximity in
the community.
5.29 Depending on the population needs of the local community they serve,
these CHC-type models may involve –
● different services co-located in the same building, or connected in the form
of virtual networks;
● different models of participation and partnership among DH, HA, private
healthcare sector, universities and/or NGOs; and
● different combinations of services and healthcare professionals.
Box 7. Better co-ordination of public primary care services provided
within existing community health complexes
● Currently, it is not uncommon for public primary care services of DH
and HA to be co-located in the same building. This could be further
developed to form CHC with better co-ordinated services. Clinics
managed by the universities may also be present.
● For instance, inside the building there may be a GOPC of HA, Elderly
Health Centre (EHC), Maternal and Child Health Centre (MCHC),
Student Health Service Centre (SHSC) of DH, and/or Family Medicine
Clinic run by a university.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
34 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● Within the health complex, while the services provided by different
organisations are developed and organised independently, there would
be scope for better co-ordination and greater synergy in the provision of
preventive and curative services by avoiding duplication, optimising the
use of space, and consciously fostering continuity of care and sharing of
patient information.
Areas for further development
5.30 The Government is working together with the healthcare professionals
and providers from the public sector, private sector, NGOs and the universities
on the development of different CHC pilot projects. Different models of
service provision will be explored in various CHC pilot projects. In general,
the following principles will be highlighted in developing CHCs and CHC-like
networks (Figure 3) -
(a) Enhance allied health and multi-disciplinary services
● The CHC models will emphasise the provision of multi-disciplinary services,
taking into consideration that more allied health and nursing support services
are needed in both the public and private primary care sectors for health
promotion and chronic disease management.
● We will explore the provision of services by nurses and/or allied health
professionals to support primary care doctors in both the public and private
sectors, especially services which are not commonly available or accessible
in the private sector; and to explore the idea of assigning nurses or allied
health professionals as case managers or care co-ordinators for patients with
complex chronic conditions.
● We will consider increasing the physical areas and facilities for organising
multi-disciplinary care, to be shared by all parties within the same location
under the CHC model.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 35
(b) Enhance health promotion activities
● The health promotional function of CHC models will be strengthened. For
instance, when physical space allows, more designated areas and facilities
for organising health promotional activities can be made available in CHCs
to be shared by all providers, e.g. areas for health information resources and
activity rooms.
● Working in collaboration with health and other sectors in the community
is essential for promoting health of the local population73,144. We will work
together with the local community and healthcare providers from different
sectors to explore the most suitable model for individual CHCs.
(c) Strengthen clinical services
● We will improve comprehensiveness of care and proactive disease
management under the CHC models. When necessary, existing clinical
services will be reviewed and/or re-organised to reduce duplication and
facilitate service development.
(d) Improve co-ordination and continuity of care
● Emphasis will be put on improving co-ordination of services provided
by different providers under the same CHC or CHC network, taking into
consideration services provided by the private sector and NGOs in the
community. We will explore ways to re-design the patient care pathway so
that preventive and curative services provided to patients or specific agegroups can be streamlined.
● Information technology systems will be used for sharing of health records
among the service providers under the same CHC models to foster continuity
of care. These individual systems will eventually form part of the territorywide eHR sharing system under development.
(e) Strengthen the efficient use of resources
● The use of resources, such as space in existing buildings, health promotion
facilities or treatment equipment, can be optimised through improvement in
service co-ordination.
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
36 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(f) Explore integrated care and strengthen collaboration with social care
and the community
● Working together with local healthcare providers of the public and private
sectors, NGOs, volunteer groups and social service agencies in the
community, we will test out models of delivering more holistic healthcare,
integrated with social services and personal care, in order to support people
of long-term conditions and high-risk groups, e.g. the elderly or patients with
multiple health and social problems.
● We will also explore different models, including the idea of having different
healthcare professionals or social workers as case managers under the CHC
models to co-ordinate the care of patients with multiple health and social or
personal care needs.
Figure 3. Community Health Centres/ CHC-like networks: possible model(s)
of care
Chapter 5. Work Progress of the Working Group on Primary Care and its Task Forces
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 37
6.1 The primary care strategy emphasises a step-by-step and consensus
building approach to reforming the healthcare system, and a virtuous cycle of
pilot-evaluation-adjustment for implementation of specific initiatives. This needs
to be done through the involvement of key stakeholders in devising appropriate
primary care models; implementing a series of well co-ordinated and evaluated
pilot projects; assessing their appropriateness at filling service gaps in Hong
Kong; and at the same time raising public awareness and promoting the value
of high quality primary care services. These pilot projects will support the
evaluation of the effectiveness and efficiency of the reform initiatives, and guide
the further development of strategies and action plans to build up the reform
process.
6.2 Since early 2009, the Government has taken forward various projects
to engage different primary care professionals from the private sector, and to
enhance the involvement and collaboration with the public sector in providing
primary care and public health functions. These initiatives include the
introduction of various healthcare voucher, healthcare partnership and vaccination
subsidy schemes, involving a total funding of $1,791 million earmarked for
period 2009-10 to 2012-13 –
● The Elderly Health Care Voucher Pilot Scheme has been launched in
January 2009 for three years up to the end of 2011. Through the provision of
partial subsidy, the Scheme aims to implement the “money-follows-patient”
concept on a trial basis. This is to enable the elderly to choose within their
local communities the private primary care services that best suit their needs,
and to pilot a new model for subsidising primary care services.
● A series of seasonal influenza and pneumococcal vaccination programmes
were introduced in 2009-10. Through the Elderly Vaccination Subsidy
Scheme, elders aged 65 years and above can receive subsidised seasonal
influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations provided by the private sector. The
Government also provides subsidy for children aged 6 months to 6 years to
receive seasonal influenza vaccinations from private doctors through the
Childhood Influenza Vaccination Subsidy Scheme.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related
 Development Already Underway
38 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● The Tin Shui Wai Primary Care Partnership Project was launched by HA
in Tin Shui Wai North in June 2008. It is a three-year pilot project which
allows chronic disease patients in stable conditions and in need of longterm follow-up treatment at public GOPCs to receive treatment from private
doctors with partial subsidy provided by the Government. Participating
patients are only required to pay the same fee as charged by GOPCs. The
programme aims to strengthen the public general out-patient services in the
district in order to address the increasing service demand and enhance the
medical care rendered to chronic disease patients.
6.3 In addition, the Government has earmarked about $465 million for the
period 2009-10 to 2011-12 to implement a series of pilot projects under the
policy initiatives of enhancing primary care announced by the Chief Executive
in his 2008-09 Policy Address. Another $600 million has been earmarked for the
period 2010-11 to 2012-13 to launch additional pilot projects and to support the
overall development of primary care.
6.4 This Chapter describes the pilot projects which are being carried out to
enhance primary care in line with the key strategies explained in Chapter 4.
Experience learned from these pilot projects and results of evaluation will be used
to guide the further development of strategies and action plans. Other initiatives
relating to the overall development of the primary care system are also outlined
in this Chapter.
(A) Pilot Projects to Enhance Services and Support for the
Management of Chronic Diseases
6.5 Building on the directions of primary care development already discussed,
there are a series of pilot projects underway to strengthen chronic disease
management.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 39
6.6 Some of these projects involve public-private partnership or partnership
between the public sector and NGOs. At the initial stage, these pilot projects
mainly target at chronic disease patients under the care of HA. The Government
will consider extending the programmes to cover chronic disease patients
receiving healthcare from the private sector.
6.7 The pilot projects are monitored and evaluated with the involvement of
third party assessors and academia to assess their acceptability, effectiveness and
efficiency. Experience gathered from these pilot projects will shed light on the
development of chronic disease management in the community, including ways
to incentivise patients to choose services provided by the private primary care
sector and enhance partnership among different healthcare providers.
(a) Multi-disciplinary Risk Factor Assessment and Management Programme
(RAMP)
● Under this programme, multi-disciplinary teams of healthcare professionals
including nurses, dietitians and pharmacists are set up at designated GOPCs
of HA in selected clusters to provide comprehensive health risk assessment
for HT and DM patients, so that they can receive appropriate preventive and
follow-up care.
● The programme will be implemented in 27 GOPCs in six clusters (including
Hong Kong East, Hong Kong West, Kowloon East, Kowloon Central,
Kowloon West and New Territories East Clusters) in 2010-11, and will be
extended to a total of 34 GOPCs in all seven clusters across the territory by
2011-12. A total of more than 167,100 patients are expected to benefit from
the programme by 2011-12.
(b) Patient Empowerment Programme (PEP)
● A pilot patient empowerment programme has been implemented in selected
clusters of HA in collaboration with NGOs to improve chronic disease
patients’ knowledge of the diseases and enhance their self-management skills.
● A multi-disciplinary team comprising allied health professionals from HA will
develop appropriate teaching materials and aids for common chronic diseases
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
40 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(for example, HT, DM, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease,
etc.), and provide training for frontline staff of the participating NGOs
organising the patient empowerment programmes.
● The programme will be extended to all seven HA clusters by 2011-12, serving
a total of 32,000 patients.
(c) Nurse and Allied Health Clinics (NAHC)
● Nurse and Allied Health Clinics comprising HA nurses and allied health
professionals have been established to provide more focused care for high-risk
chronic disease patients, including those who require specific care services
for health problems or complications. These services include fall prevention,
handling of chronic respiratory problems, wound care, continence care, drug
compliance and supporting mental wellness for individual patients.
● Pilot NAHCs are being established in selected GOPCs to provide these
specific care support services. The programme is implemented in more than
40 GOPCs in all seven HA clusters with a total number of more than 224,500
attendances by 2011-12.
(d) Public-Private Chronic Disease Management Shared Care Programme
(“Shared Care Programme”)
● At present, many chronic disease patients are receiving follow-up treatment
at specialist out-patient clinics (SOPCs) of HA. Many of them are in stable
conditions and can receive management in the primary care setting.
● The Shared Care Programme is a pilot project offering chronic disease
patients currently under the care of the public healthcare system additional
choices to have their conditions followed up by private doctors. The
programme provides partial subsidy for patients to receive comprehensive
management in the community, and supports the establishment of long-term
partnership between patients and doctors of their choice. The Shared Care
Programme primarily targets DM and HT patients who are currently taken
care of by the public healthcare system.
● Through this programme, the Government seeks to assess the effectiveness
of the primary care conceptual models and reference frameworks for DM and
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 41
HT developed by WGPC in disease management; test the service delivery
model of public-private shared care for chronic disease patients; strengthen
the involvement of private primary care doctors in the prevention and
treatment of chronic diseases; and enhance the capability of the healthcare
system in providing more comprehensive and continuing care for chronic
disease patients.
Incentives to encourage quality care and self-management
● Participating private doctors are required to provide patients with
comprehensive and continuing care based on the conceptual models and
reference frameworks developed by WGPC.
● To encourage doctors to provide protocol-based management to patients, the
Government will provide quality incentives to participating doctors when
preset process indicators of care are met.
● To encourage patients to participate more actively in the management of
their diseases, the Government will provide financial incentives to patients
who show good compliance with management and can meet the preset health
outcome indicators.
Support to private doctors and patients joining the programme
● HA is organising training and sharing sessions for participating private doctors
with a view to facilitating communication and experience sharing between the
public and private healthcare sectors.
● The public healthcare system will continue to monitor the conditions of
patients and allow patients with deteriorating conditions to go back to the
SOPCs for timely management.
● The Shared Care Programme is currently being piloted in Sha Tin and Tai
Po of the New Territories East Cluster and Wan Chai and Eastern District
of the Hong Kong East Cluster. Independent assessment body is engaged
in the continuous evaluation of programme process and effectiveness. The
Government and HA will make appropriate adjustments to the direction and
detailed arrangements of the programme where necessary having regard to the
results of evaluation and experience gained from the programme.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
42 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(B) Primary Dental Care
6.8 Dentists and other dental care professionals are important members of a
multi-disciplinary primary care team in promoting oral and dental health. Poor
oral health and dental problems can cause pain and discomfort, difficulty in eating
(which in worse cases can result in deteriorating diet and compromised nutrition),
impaired speech and loss of self-esteem. Improving oral health of the population
is a major initiative advocated by WHO145.
6.9 Currently in Hong Kong, primary dental care services are mainly provided
by the private sector and NGOs. Public dental services essentially focus on
the provision of emergency dental treatment to the public and basic dental care
for primary school children. DH is also responsible for organising oral health
promotion programmes in the community.
6.10 Previous surveys of oral and dental health among the local population
showed that there is a need for improving oral health promotion and dental
care, especially for the elderly people146. In this connection, the Government is
working with NGOs and dental professionals on initiatives to strengthen dental
care for the needy elderly. The Government has earmarked resources to enhance
primary dental care, mainly to support the development of pilot projects to
improve dental care services of the needy elderly and to strengthen oral health
promotion.
6.11 A Task Force on Primary Dental Care and Oral Health has been formed
in late 2010 under WGPC, with representatives from the dental profession,
academics, patient groups, HA and concerned government officials. The Task
Force will advise the Government on the strategy and measures for development
of primary dental care and promotion of oral health in Hong Kong as well as
the formulation and implementation of related specific initiatives including pilot
projects and surveys. The Task Force will also advise on the strategies and
measures aiming to enhance the professional development of dentists and other
supporting healthcare professionals.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 43
 (C) Strengthening Mental Health Services in Primary Care
Setting
6.12 International perspectives recognise the advantages of integrating care for
mental health problems into the primary care system147. Primary care providers
can play an important role in promoting mental health, providing counselling,
early diagnosis, early identification, and strengthening community-based care.
There is a need to strengthen collaboration among psychiatric specialists, primary
care providers and social service sector to improve care and support for mental
patients in the community.
6.13 The Government plans to improve mental healthcare through the provision
of a comprehensive range of services on early intervention, medical treatment
and community support, embracing a multi-disciplinary and cross-sectoral team
approach. The Working Group on Mental Health Services, which is chaired
by the Secretary for Food and Health and comprises experts and representatives
from the health sector, welfare sector and academia, assists the Government in
reviewing and improving its mental health services on an on-going basis.
6.14 Upon the advice of the Working Group on Mental Health Services, the
Government seeks to enhance the support services to mental patients in the
community setting through a number of initiatives.
● HA has set up Common Mental Disorder Clinics to provide patients with
common mental disorders with more timely assessment and consultation
services.
● HA has since October 2010 piloted an Integrated Mental Health Programme
(IMHP) in five clusters to engage primary care services in supporting these
patients. Under the IMHP, HA patients with stabilised and milder mental
health conditions will be referred to GOPCs for further management by family
medicine specialists and general practitioners working in multi-disciplinary
teams.
● As announced in the 2010-11 Policy Address, HA will expand the IMHP to
cover all clusters in 2011-12 in order to tackle more effectively cases of mild
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
44 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
mental illness in the community. The Government will continue to promote
collaboration between HA psychiatric specialist out-patient services and
primary care services to enhance the support for patients with common mental
disorders.
(D) Strengthening Infrastructural Support on Health Record
Sharing
6.15 In the discussion paper “Building a Healthy Tomorrow”, it was
recommended that in order to facilitate the best use of resources and provide the
framework necessary for smooth transition of patients between different levels of
care and between the public and private sectors, it would be essential to develop
a system which enables better access and sharing of patients’ health records with
patients’ consent17.
6.16 The development of a territory-wide patient-oriented eHR sharing system
has gained broad support in the first stage public consultation on healthcare
reform48. Participation in eHR sharing will be voluntary and the sharing of
patient health records is subject to patients’ express and informed consent.
6.17 The eHR sharing system and the use of information technology will
provide an essential tool to support the provision of comprehensive, continuing
and better co-ordinated healthcare services for individuals. It enables patients
to take greater ownership and control of their health records, and in turn their
health. The connection between hospitals and primary care practitioners and that
between the public and private healthcare sectors through the eHR sharing system
can also promote public-private partnership and integration of care.
6.18 To this end, the Government has taken a leading role in eHR development
to handle the complex development involving a multitude of healthcare providers
and sensitivity of personal health data. A dedicated eHR Office was set up in
FHB in 2009 to steer and oversee the ten-year eHR Programme (from 2009-10
to 2018-19), with the technical support of HA which has developed a Clinical
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 45
Management System encompassing more than 8 million records. Under the
guidance of the Steering Committee on eHR Sharing comprising members
from both the public and private sectors, the eHR Office will spearhead and coordinate the ten-year programme with a view to ensuring coherent development
in both the public and private sectors.
6.19 The objectives of the First Stage eHR Programme (from 2009-10 to
2013-14) include –
(a) to set up the eHR sharing platform by 2013-14 for connection with all public
and private hospitals;
(b) to have integrated electronic medical/patient record (eMR/ePR) systems and
other health information systems available in the market for private doctors,
clinics and other health service providers to connect to the eHR sharing
platform; and
(c) to formulate a legal framework for the eHR sharing system to protect data
privacy and system security prior to commissioning of the system.
6.20 In order to facilitate patient participation in eHR sharing, the eHR Office
also targets to set up a patient portal with secure access and patient identity
authentication by the Second Stage eHR Programme (from 2014-15 to 2018-
19). Through the patient portal, patients can view their own essential health data
in the eHR sharing system. Besides, patients may request correction of data,
and manage their consent to their eHR participation and the relationship with
healthcare providers.
6.21 The development of the eHR sharing system can also support evidencebased practice such as the use and sharing of health data for better informed
decision making and improvement in quality of care. It also helps generate
epidemiological information important for public health research and planning of
primary care development.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
46 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(E) Strengthening Research on Primary Care
6.22 To support healthcare reform, many developed countries have taken a
proactive strategic approach in developing research strategies1,148,149,150. The
Government will continue to support and strengthen primary care-related
research which is crucial for guiding the development of quality primary care.
Reinforcement of such research would be essential for formulating evidencebased policies and strategies; identifying the needs and priorities of primary care
in respect of different diseases and age groups; evaluating the effectiveness of
different pilot projects and initiatives; and assessing the overall effectiveness
of the primary care system in improving healthcare system and health of the
population in order to refine the development strategies.
6.23 The Government has reserved resources for conducting research projects
on primary care. Working together with the health professions, academia and
researchers, research projects will be carried out in the following main areas –
(a) to assess the healthcare needs of different population and patient groups;
(b) to review local and international evidence on effective strategies to improve
primary care;
(c) to explore methods to promote patient empowerment and patient-centred
care;
(d) to evaluate the implementation, effectiveness and efficiency of various pilot
projects that aim at improving primary care services; and
(e) to formulate the directions of primary care workforce development.
6.24 Sustainable enhancement of quality primary care also requires capacity
and structural support for research and evidence-based practice. We will develop
infrastructure to support population-based health-related research, for example,
by making use of the eHR sharing system. Through the collaboration with key
stakeholders, we will further facilitate knowledge exchange among academia,
researchers, practitioners and policy makers, and strengthen the local and
international health services research networks.
Chapter 6. Pilot Projects and Primary Care-related Development Already Underway
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 47
7.1 The long-term development of a strong primary care system responding
effectively and efficiently to the changing needs of population is a continuous
process that entails multi-partite collaboration and multi-pronged strategies. The
Government will continue to learn from regional and international experience,
and engage the health professions, patient groups and other key stakeholders to
develop strategies to enhance primary care and strengthen its major attributes for
the provision of quality care to our population.
7.2 The following paragraphs outline areas that the Government will explore
through the Primary Care Office (please see Chapter 8) under the advice of
WGPC and in consultation with relevant stakeholders in building a good primary
care system based on the key strategies explained in Chapter 4.
(a) How can we strengthen the provision of better co-ordinated, comprehensive
and continuing primary care?
(i) Enhance primary care providers’ role as co-ordinators of care for
their patients, such as referring patients to seek higher levels of care
for allied health services where needed. This is of special value in
supporting and improving the care for chronic disease patients and the
elderly151,152.
(ii) Explore ways to encourage each individual to have a regular primary
care practitioner/ a team of primary care providers as partner and
advisor to co-ordinate healthcare that suits his/her needs throughout the
life-course.
(iii) Develop nurses and allied health professionals as case managers to coordinate care for chronic disease patients and the elderly. Projects in
this regard have been carried out locally to support the community and
hospital-discharged patients with encouraging results153,154,155.
(iv) New collaborative models to enhance multi-disciplinary care,
including the mechanisms for allowing private doctors to refer patients
to allied health or nursing care services in the public sector or NGOs
should be considered. Models of collaboration with Chinese medicine
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
48 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
practitioners, dentists, pharmacists and other healthcare providers in the
community should also be examined.
(v) Continuity of care can be improved by re-arrangement of care provision
so that patients, especially those with long-term conditions, can be taken
care of by the same team of providers. Sharing of disease management
protocols and joint development of care plans can foster management
continuity, and provide predictability for action for both patients and
providers.
(vi) Improve integration of primary care with the whole healthcare
system. In particular, the following should be observed –
● In planning and developing primary care services for the local
community, existing health services provided by the public sector, private
sector and NGOs should be taken into account; engagement of local
people and other stakeholders should be encouraged.
● Referral between primary care and specialist or hospital care should
entail a two-way flow of information. This will need changes in
management arrangement and establishment of platform for sharing.
● Different models of integrated care should be explored, especially
in the development of CHCs or CHC networks. For instance, models
that integrate multi-disciplinary primary care with social services and
personal care, supported by secondary care services, NGOs and volunteer
groups in the community, can be developed to improve care and support
for chronic disease patients and high-risk elderly. Overseas integrated
systems that have been shown to be effective to variable degrees in
improving process of care, patient outcome and quality of care, such as
the model developed by Kaiser Permanente156,157, The Medical Home
Mode152, the Chronic Care Model118,158, the WHO Innovative Care
for Chronic Conditions Framework144, and the NHS and Social Care
model159, could be taken as reference.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 49
(b) How can we take a more proactive approach in tackling chronic diseases
in Hong Kong?
(i)  Adopt a proactive and preventive approach
● It is internationally recognised that a proactive and preventive approach
in the control of chronic diseases is needed8,72,119,160. This involves a
system-wide approach across the spectrum of primary, secondary and
tertiary levels of prevention c,10,101.
● The life-course approachd
 emphasises the potential for identifying the
most appropriate and effective policies for chronic disease prevention
and health promotion through reduction of risk at all stages of life161,162.
This could be strengthened by the development and implementation of
age-group specific preventive reference frameworks.
(ii) Evidence supports the effectiveness of doctors’ advice and the role of
nurses in health promotion, such as smoking cessation and exercise
promotion163,164. Programmes such as the “Exercise Prescription
Programme” have been organised locally to engage private doctors in
exercise promotion165. Initiatives and collaborative models should be
explored to facilitate primary care providers in promoting health.
(iii) Strengthen and further explore appropriate models for chronic
disease management. The modern model of management for chronic
diseases incorporates disease prevention and identification, risk
stratification, multi-disciplinary support, evidence-based practice, sharing
of information, patient empowerment, engagement of the community,
and integration among different providers. Such an approach is shown
to be effective in providing better care, improving patient outcomes, and
reducing complications, hospitalisation and healthcare cost144,157.
c. Primary prevention10,101 is directed towards preventing the initial occurrence of a disorder.
Secondary and tertiary prevention seeks to arrest or retard existing disease and its effects
through early detection and appropriate treatment; or to reduce the occurrence of relapses and
the establishment of chronic complications through, for example, effective rehabilitation.
d. The life-course approach161 considers chronic disease in terms of the social and physical
hazards, and the consequent biological, behavioural and psychosocial processes that operate
across all stages of the life-span to cause or modify risk of disease. The risk of chronic disease
accumulates with age. This perspective carries a substantial potential for identifying the most
appropriate and effective policies for chronic disease prevention and health promotion through
reduction of risk at all stages of life.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
50 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
(iv) Integrate primary care services with public health function in disease
prevention and health promotion has been underscored by WHO.
Primary care providers’ role in health promotion as well as prevention of
diseases and injuries should continue to be strengthened. Partnership of
primary care services with the community, volunteer groups, schools,
workplaces, etc. is needed for effective health promotion and prevention
of diseases –
● For instance, advice given by doctors on lifestyle modifications will need
community-wide, cross-sectoral support to make the social and physical
environments more desirable for sustainable changes in behaviours such
as healthy diet and physical activity.
● The Government has developed a “Strategic Framework for Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases” to improve the population’s
health profile and reduce the local burden of non-communicable diseases
(NCD)67. A Steering Committee on Prevention and Control of NCD has
also been set up to deliberate on and oversee the overall roadmap for
implementation. WGPC and the Steering Committee on Prevention and
Control of NCD will co-ordinate and align the recommended strategies
and action plans to support territory-wide efforts for better chronic
disease prevention and management.
(c) What do we need to do to further enhance the availability of comprehensive
care for chronic diseases?
(i) Plan service development from a population perspective and improve
co-ordination among different service providers to develop primary
care services that are most needed, and to use resources efficiently. This
also includes re-aligning the roles of public and private providers to
enable more efficient skill-mix and co-ordination of care –
● Strengthen public-private partnership in chronic disease management
through better co-ordination, shared care plans and appropriate
subsidisation so that stable chronic disease patients can receive services
in the private primary care sector.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 51
● Improve price transparency in the private sector so that patients can make
informed choices.
● The public primary care sector should continue to focus on serving the
low-income, the under-privileged and the elderly.
(ii) Availability of out-of-hours services is also important for making
primary care more accessible and reducing misuse of the emergency
department for non-urgent consultations.
(d) How can we promote person-centred care and patient empowerment?
(i) Re-structure service delivery to promote patient participation and
improve self-management support166,167 –
● Patients could be allowed to play a more active role in designing their
care plans and setting goals. Involvement of patients and carer
support groups in care planning can enhance their confidence and skills.
(ii) It is important to develop patients’ health literacy and skills for better
disease monitoring and self-care.
(iii) Developing wider community support and collaboration is essential.
Apart from the public and private medical services, NGOs, volunteer
groups and other sectors such as workplaces and schools have
been playing an important role in supporting person-centred care and
patient empowerment in the community. Their role should be further
strengthened.
(iv) It is necessary to incorporate patient-centred care and patient
empowerment in research agenda and the training curriculum of
health professions.
(e) How can we strengthen the development of primary care workforce?
(i) Strengthen primary care-oriented training and put emphasis on interdisciplinary collaboration.
● Apart from training healthcare professionals for the provision of clinical
care, we need to support primary care-oriented training and enhance
community perspectives in both undergraduate and postgraduate
development levels1,55,108,168,169.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
52 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● Newer models of inter-professional learning and cultivation of multidisciplinary team work are areas to be explored.
(ii) Enhance training for family doctors and primary care dentists for the
provision of good primary care –
● Support professional training of doctors, including training on family
medicine provided by the Hong Kong College of Family Physicians,
the Hong Kong Academy of Medicine (HKAM) and universities, in
collaboration with HA and private doctors.
● Work with the dental profession and the College of Dental Surgeons of
Hong Kong regarding the development of professional training on
primary dental care.
● Work with training institutions and the HKAM to strengthen primary carerelated CME and CPD activities provided for doctors, nurses and dentists.
(iii) Enhance the role of nurses, allied health and other professionals
in the community. This requires appropriate training at all career
stages. Re-defining the roles and scope of practice of various healthcare
professionals can be another strategy to make better use of an
increasingly diversified workforce and help secure supply of the right
skill-mix of professions.
● Initiatives to strengthen the functions of the Community Nursing Service
(CNS), which has been providing invaluable support to patients living
in the community, should be explored. For instance, pilot nurse clinics
will be set up in public estates to provide centre-based model of care in
the community, especially for the elderly, and to collaborate with the local
NGOs and the community for promoting health of the local population.
● It is worthwhile to examine the more recent progress of nurse specialists
(e.g. diabetic and cardiac nurse specialists) as well as nurse or allied
health-led patient support programmes and case managers with a
view to guiding their future development.
● Chinese medicine practitioners are important providers of primary
care services in the community. The Government has started working
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 53
with Chinese medicine practitioners on the development of primary care
services, including the provision of multi-disciplinary primary care.
(iv) Provision of support for quality improvement and evidence-based
practice is important for the development of good primary care170,171.
Various means for improving healthcare quality is listed in Box 8.
(v) We will work with healthcare professionals, academia and training
institutes on the overall planning and development of manpower to meet
the changing needs of the Hong Kong population.
Box 8. Quality improvement in healthcare
The following areas need to be addressed and strengthened for quality
improvement172 –
Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
● We can make use of the current platforms to encourage continuing
professional development through provision of postgraduate training
and accreditation of qualifications, continuing medical education, and
requirements on renewal of practising licence or specialist status.
● Professional development will be developed through consultative
processes with the professionals, healthcare oragnisations, regulatory
authorities, patients and the public157.
Accountability
● Primary care providers should be encouraged to become active partners
in improving the quality of care. We need to enhance mechanisms for
feedback of process and health outcomes, and to facilitate decision
making and experience sharing.
Guidelines for evidence-based practices
● Development of practice guidelines which are used and shared by
different providers help define best practice, transfer evidence-based
knowledge into actions for better quality and safety of care, and coordinate inputs for prevention and control of diseases.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
54 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Support for decision making and formulation of management plans
● System support for decision making, feedback, communications,
professional development and co-ordination of care can improve quality
of care120,121,122. This can be facilitated by improving infrastructural
support and developing the eHR sharing system.
Incentives
● Financial incentives have been introduced in some countries to
encourage best practice, support service improvement and promote
patient empowerment173,174,175,176. The use of financial incentives in
various primary care pilot projects and their effectiveness should be
closely monitored and evaluated.
(f) How can we improve long-term organisational and infrastructural
support?
(i) A Primary Care Office has been set up, staffed by FHB, DH and HA,
to better co-ordinate territory-wide development of primary care and
service delivery. The Government will engage healthcare professionals
and other stakeholders in directing the development of primary care.
(ii) Continue to strengthen collaborative efforts among healthcare
providers from different sectors to develop services to fill the existing
gaps. This can be enhanced through local platforms such as the CHCs
and the Health City Projects.
(iii) Continue to develop the eHR sharing system to support information
sharing, which can foster the development of better primary care.
(iv) Provide resources to support the long-term development of primary
care having regard to the overall progress of healthcare reform, including
supplementary healthcare financing arrangements and the resources
available for health care.
Chapter 7. The Need for Further Development
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 55
8.1 The development of primary care requires long-term and on-going
commitment, which in turn entails continuous and well co-ordinated strategies
and actions which have been described in the previous chapters. A Primary
Care Office (PCO) has been set up in DH to support and co-ordinate the
development of primary care in Hong Kong, implement the primary care
development strategies and actions, and co-ordinate actions among DH, HA, the
private healthcare sector, NGOs and other healthcare providers. The dedicated
PCO provides the necessary staffing support to co-ordinate the implementation
of various projects to enhance primary care. It also provides the repository
of necessary expertise and experience that are crucial for the successful
implementation of the primary care development strategy.
8.2 To foster better co-ordination and provide the appropriate skill-mix for
developing and implementing primary care initiatives, PCO will be a joint office
comprising staff and healthcare professionals from FHB, DH and HA.
8.3 The respective roles of WGPC, FHB, PCO, the public and private
healthcare sectors and other healthcare providers are as follows –
(a) WGPC (chaired by the Secretary for Food and Health) – to advise on
strategic direction for enhancing and developing primary care in Hong Kong;
(b) FHB – to formulate policies on primary care and consider resources
requirement based on direction advised by WGPC and to oversee the
implementation of the primary care development strategy.
(c) PCO – to provide support to FHB on policy formulation and strategy
development on primary care, and to co-ordinate DH, HA, private healthcare
providers and other relevant stakeholders for the implementation of policies
and initiatives to enhance primary care; and
(d) DH, HA, the private healthcare sector and other healthcare providers – to
provide primary care services to the public.
Chapter 8. Setting up a Primary Care Office
56 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Duties of PCO
8.4 The main mission of PCO is to further develop and implement the
strategies for primary care development in Hong Kong, including those outlined
in this document. Major functions of PCO include –
(a) to co-ordinate DH, HA, private healthcare providers and other stakeholders
to implement population-wide policies and strategies to enhance primary care
under the steer of FHB;
(b) to plan and oversee the work of public education for continuing promotion of
good primary care;
(c) to draw on appropriate professional advice to develop and promote primary
care conceptual models, clinical reference frameworks for major diseases and
preventive reference frameworks for different age groups;
(d) to establish and maintain the Primary Care Directory;
(e) to explore, plan and implement different primary care service delivery models
including the setting up of CHCs or CHC networks in local communities
through partnership with the public and private sectors and NGOs;
(f) to support the development of primary care providers as well as primary careoriented training for healthcare professionals;
(g) to conduct and co-ordinate research projects to assess the needs for primary
care services in Hong Kong, and to work with independent assessment bodies
to evaluate the effectiveness of reform initiatives; and
(h) to provide secretariat support to the Task Forces under WGPC.
8.5 To strengthen the engagement of a wider scope of relevant stakeholders
in developing initiatives to enhance primary care, various Task Forces and subgroups will be set up under WGPC to plan and take forward specific tasks to
strengthen primary care services, e.g. setting up of CHCs and development of
primary dental care. Clinical Advisory Groups will also be formed to review
existing and develop new conceptual models and reference frameworks, and to
advise on research and evaluation of pilot projects.
8.6 Making use of the occasion of publishing the strategy document on
development of primary care, PCO will embark on a large-scale primary care
Chapter 8. Setting up a Primary Care Office
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 57
campaign targeting both healthcare professionals and the public. For example,
we will meet the healthcare professionals and patient groups, host forums
and promote through various mass media channels. The aims are to raise
public awareness on the importance of primary care in disease prevention and
management, encourage the public to adopt the core values of good primary
care and embrace a proactive approach in improving health, and appeal to and
engage the medical professional bodies to participate in the promotion of quality
primary care. The momentum generated by this primary care campaign will need
to be sustained through a continuous and well co-ordinated programme of health
education and promotion initiatives in order to turn awareness into action, so that
the objective of facilitating behavioural change of both individuals and healthcare
providers can be achieved.
Chapter 8. Setting up a Primary Care Office
58 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
9.1 Healthcare systems are at the frontier of change in responding to the
challenges posed by the epidemic of chronic diseases, the increasingly ageing
population and the technological advancement in healthcare. There are pressing
needs to re-direct and enhance the healthcare system towards the provision
of readily accessible, comprehensive and co-ordinated first contact primary
care that is continuous, preventive and person-centred in the community. The
development of high quality primary care services requires strengthening support
at organisational, infrastructural, professional development and community
levels.
9.2 There are numerous areas for further development. Many initiatives,
including but not limited to those referred to in this document, are on-going.
We need concerted efforts in the long term for developing and improving the
healthcare system in Hong Kong. The invaluable contribution from experts
and key stakeholders is highly appreciated, but it is the views of every Hong
Kong citizen that count. Despite the complexity of our existing system, we are
making progress to meet the healthcare needs and aspirations of our population.
However, we still have to devote more effort to achieve our vision.
9.3 This document outlines the strategies for primary care development in
Hong Kong and highlights the important areas for improvement. The Government
will continue to take responsibility for co-ordinating and supporting the reform
process that will develop a better healthcare system and improve the health of
our society. It is only through the participation of all of us that we can establish a
primary care system that is effective, efficient, sustainable, and responsive to the
ever-changing needs of our population.
9.4 Based on experience learnt and evaluation of the pilot projects, we will
conduct a comprehensive review on the overall primary care development
strategy every four to five years starting from now. The Government will coordinate the review through PCO and continue to engage stakeholders in the
process through WGPC with a view to developing a better healthcare system.
Chapter 9. Conclusion
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 59
Feedback from the first stage public consultation on healthcare reform on
initiatives to reform primary care and service delivery in Hong Kong48 –
In general, the public and healthcare professions support the following –
● There was an imminent need to reform the current healthcare system and
improve the capacity and quality of healthcare services it provided.
● The Government should take the lead in carrying out reforms to our healthcare
system, while preserving its current strengths, including our public healthcare
system being accessible to all.
● There should be comprehensive reform on various interlinked aspects of the
healthcare system in order to ensure its sustainability.
● The direction of enhancing primary care, and the proposals to improve
existing primary care services and put greater emphasis on preventive care,
including developing primary care service basic models, establishing a family
doctor register, subsidising preventive care services, improving public primary
care services, and strengthening public health education, were supported.
● More resources should be devoted to developing comprehensive, holistic and
life-long primary care services that would emphasise disease prevention in the
community.
● There should be a stronger role by the Government in primary care, especially
in ensuring the standard and quality of services.
● The healthcare professions expressed general support to the direction for
primary care reform, and every profession considered that they had a role to
play in primary care, including in the proposed basic models for primary care
and family doctor register, which many professions considered should not be
confined to western medicine doctors.
● Some community organisations recognised the need for seamless
collaboration and interfacing between primary care, community health care,
and social services available within the community, especially elderly care.
Many also recognised the importance of making use of the local community
networks in enhancing primary care, e.g. promoting healthy lifestyles.
Annex A
60 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
● The public in general supported the direction of promoting public-private
partnership in the provision of healthcare services, which could encourage
healthy competition and collaboration between public and private sectors,
thereby providing more cost-effective services and more choices of services.
Some respondents considered that public-private partnership should provide a
cost-effective way to shorten the waiting time for public services.
● The healthcare professions in general welcomed the proposals to promote
public-private partnership, which they felt should include a commitment by
the Government to support the development of the private healthcare sector.
● The majority supported the proposals for developing the eHR sharing system,
noting its benefits to patients by enhancing efficiency and quality of care
through avoiding duplicative investigation and facilitating collaboration
among different healthcare professionals.
Areas of concerns –
● The healthcare professions had different views on the appropriate delivery
model for comprehensive primary care, including the respective roles of
different healthcare professionals. Some healthcare professionals also
expressed concerns over the respective roles of the public and private sectors
in delivering primary care to the public.
● Some respondents expressed concerns over whether the pursuit of publicprivate partnership might lead to the reduction of resources available for
the public sector and affect the healthcare for the low-income and underprivileged groups, as well as further segmentation of accessible healthcare
services.
● Some healthcare professionals expressed concerns that public-private
partnership might lead to unfair competition or interfere with the existing
operation of the private healthcare market.
● Some consumer and patient groups asked for proper monitoring and
transparency under the public-private partnership models.
Annex A
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 61
Annex A
● Some healthcare professionals expressed concerns about the high cost of
implementation of the eHR sharing system and likely impact on their existing
mode of operations. Most considered that the Government should take the
lead in devoting resources to develop eHR sharing as an infrastructure, and
should provide incentives and support for practitioners to do so.
● In connection with the service reforms, concerns on a number of other related
issues that would need to be addressed were also raised. These include –
• the manpower capacity and training of healthcare professionals;
• the capacity of the private healthcare sector and the transparency,
quality and standard of services it offers;
• the development of specific areas of healthcare services, such as
Chinese medicine, dental services, mental health services, infirmary
services and long-term medical care; and
• the institutional set-up of the healthcare system. 
62 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Health and Medical Development Advisory Committee
Working Group on Primary Care
Terms of Reference
1. The Working Group on Primary Care (WGPC) under the Health and
Medical Development Advisory Committee (HMDAC), chaired by the Secretary
for Food and Health (with the Under Secretary for Food and Health as the
alternate chairman) and comprising members from both the public and private
sectors, shall be responsible for making recommendations to HMDAC on how
to implement the various proposals in the Healthcare Reform Consultation
Document “Your Health, Your Life” related to enhancing primary care in Hong
Kong.
2. Specifically, the responsibilities of WGPC shall include making
recommendations to HMDAC on the following –
(a) primary care service models that are locally relevant and feasible, with an
emphasis on preventive care as a core component of comprehensive primary
care;
(b) age-specific and sex-specific clinical protocols in the primary care setting,
for reference by healthcare professionals and patients in both the public and
private sectors;
(c) a Primary Care Directory to promote the family doctor concept and to provide
patients with adequate information for identifying healthcare providers who
provide comprehensive primary care to patients;
(d) strategies to promote the recommended service models, reference frameworks
and Primary Care Directory to the public and healthcare professionals, and to
incentivise their use and adherence respectively;
(e) institutional framework and mechanism for the establishment and
maintenance of the service models, reference frameworks and the Directory,
including the necessary training requirements;
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 63
(f) operational models for the delivery of comprehensive primary care to the
public with the involvement of different healthcare professionals, such as the
“Community Health Centre” concept; and
(g) any other issues relevant to the promotion and enhancement of primary care.
3. WGPC may set up Task Forces to undertake any of the above tasks
and formulate proposals for WGPC to make recommendations to HMDAC.
Secretariat support to WGPC is provided by the Food and Health Bureau,
whereas secretariat support to the Task Forces under WGPC is provided by the
Primary Care Office of the Department of Health.
Annex B
64 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Working Group on Primary Care
Membership List
Chairman Dr York CHOW Yat-ngok
Secretary for Food and Health
Alternate
Chairman
Prof Gabriel M LEUNG
Under Secretary for Food and Health
Food and Health
Bureau
Ms Sandra LEE Suk-yee
Permanent Secretary for Food and Health (Health)
Members Ms Elaine CHAN Sau-ho
Vice President, Group & Credit Insurance
Health Services Department
American International Assurance Company (Bermuda)
Limited
Dr CHAN Wai-man
Assistant Director of Health (Family & Elderly Health
Services)
Department of Health
Dr Joseph CHAN Woon-tong
Deputy Medical Superintendent
Head, Department of Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Hong Kong Sanatorium & Hospital
Dr Lincoln CHEE Wang-jin
Chief Executive Officer
Quality Health Care Asia Limited
Dr Raymond CHEN Chung-i
Chief Executive Officer
Hong Kong Baptist Hospital
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 65
Annex B
Mr CHEUNG Tak-hai
Vice-chairperson
Alliance for Patients’ Mutual Help Organizations
Dr CHU Leung-wing
Consultant & Chief Division of Geriatric Medicine
Queen Mary Hospital and Grantham Hospital
Hospital Authority
Dr Daniel CHU Wai-sing
Chief of Service and Cluster Service Coordinator (Family
Medicine and Primary Healthcare) and
Deputy Cluster Service Director (Community Services)
Hong Kong East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Ms Ivis CHUNG Wai-yee
Chief Manager (Allied Health)
Hospital Authority
Ms Sylvia FUNG Yuk-kuen
Chief Manager (Nursing) /Chief Nurse Executive
Hospital Authority
Prof Sian GRIFFITHS
Professor of Public Health
Director, School of Public Health and Primary Care
Faculty of Medicine
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Ms Agnes HO Kam-har
Head of Medical and Group Life
HSBC Insurance (Asia) Limited
66 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Dr Ronnie HUI Ka-wah
Chief Finance Officer and Executive Director
Town Health International Holdings Co., Ltd.
Prof Cindy LAM Lo-kuen
Professor and Head, Department of Family Medicine and
Primary Care
The University of Hong Kong
Ms Connie LAU Yin-hing
Chief Executive, Consumer Council
Dr Paco LEE Wang-yat
Specialist in Family Medicine
St. Paul’s Hospital
Dr Sigmund LEUNG Sai-man
President, Hong Kong Dental Association
Dr Donald LI Kwok-tung
Specialist in Family Medicine
Director, Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre
Prof LIU Liang
Dean, School of Chinese Medicine
Hong Kong Baptist University
Dr LO Su-vui
Director (Strategy and Planning)
Hospital Authority
Dr Louis SHIH Tai-cho
Specialist in Dermatology & Venereology
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 67
Annex B
Dr TSE Hung-hing
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong Medical Association
Dr Gene TSOI Wai-wang
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong College of Family Physicians
Dr Nelson WONG Chi-kit
Head, Corporate Medical Scheme Service
Dr Vio & Partners
Prof Thomas WONG Kwok-shing
Vice President (Management)
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Prof George WOO
Dean, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr YEUNG Chiu-fat
President, Hong Kong Doctors Union
68 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Task Force on Conceptual Model and Preventive Protocols
Membership List
Convenor Prof Sian GRIFFITHS
Professor of Public Health
Director, School of Public Health and Primary Care
Faculty of Medicine
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Members Dr Alfred AU Si-yan
Service Director (Community Care)
New Territories West Cluster, Hospital Authority
Prof Cecilia CHAN Lai-wan
Si Yuan Professor in Health and Social Work
Director, Centre on Behavioral Health
Professor, Department of Social Work and Social
Administration
The University of Hong Kong
Dr CHAN Wai-man
Assistant Director of Health (Family & Elderly Health
Services)
Department of Health
Dr Joseph CHAN Woon-tong
Deputy Medical Superintendent
Head, Department of Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Hong Kong Sanatorium & Hospital
Dr Lincoln CHEE Wang-jin
Chief Executive Officer
Quality Health Care Asia Limited
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 69
Annex B
Mr CHEUNG Tak-hai
Vice-chairperson
Alliance for Patients’ Mutual Help Organizations
Dr Regina CHING Cheuk-tuen
Assistant Director of Health (Health Promotion)
Department of Health
Dr CHU Leung-wing
Consultant & Chief Division of Geriatric Medicine
Queen Mary Hospital and Grantham Hospital
Hospital Authority
Dr Daniel CHU Wai-sing
Chief of Service and Cluster Service Coordinator (Family
Medicine and Primary Healthcare) and
Deputy Cluster Service Director (Community Services)
Hong Kong East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Ms Ivis CHUNG Wai-yee
Chief Manager (Allied Health)
Hospital Authority
Ms Sylvia FUNG Yuk-kuen
Chief Manager (Nursing) /Chief Nurse Executive
Hospital Authority
Dr Ronnie HUI Ka-wah
Chief Finance Officer and Executive Director
Town Health International Holdings Co., Ltd.
70 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Prof Cindy LAM Lo-kuen
Professor and Head
Department of Family Medicine and Primary Care
The University of Hong Kong
Convenor of the Task Force on Primary Care Directory
Dr Augustine LAM Tsan
Chief of Service, Family Medicine
New Territories East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Dr Sigmund LEUNG Sai-man
President, Hong Kong Dental Association
Dr Shirley LEUNG Sze-lee
Principal Medical & Health Officer (Family Health
Service)
Department of Health
Dr LEUNG Ting-hung
Head, Surveillance & Epidemiology Branch
Centre for Health Protection, Department of Health
Dr Donald LI Kwok-tung
Specialist in Family Medicine
Director, Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre
Prof LIU Liang
Dean, School of Chinese Medicine
Hong Kong Baptist University
Dr LO Su-vui
Director (Strategy and Planning), Hospital Authority
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 71
Annex B
Dr Louis SHIH Tai-cho
Specialist in Dermatology & Venereology
Convenor of the Task Force on Primary Care Delivery
Models
Dr TSE Hung-hing
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong Medical Association
Dr Gene TSOI Wai-wang
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong College of Family Physicians
Prof Thomas WONG Kwok-shing
Vice President (Management)
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr Marcus WONG Mong-sze
Associate Consultant
Family Medicine and Primary Healthcare
Hong Kong East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Prof George WOO
Dean, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr YEUNG Chiu-fat
President, Hong Kong Doctors Union
Dr Betty YOUNG Wan-yin
Honorary Consultant
Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine
Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital
72 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Task Force on Primary Care Directory
Membership List
Convenor Prof Cindy LAM Lo-kuen
Professor and Head
Department of Family Medicine and Primary Care
The University of Hong Kong
Members Dr Amy CHAN Kit-ling
Private General Practitioner
Dr CHAN Wai-man
Assistant Director of Health (Family & Elderly Health
Services)
Department of Health
Dr Joseph CHAN Woon-tong
Deputy Medical Superintendent
Head, Department of Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Hong Kong Sanatorium & Hospital
Dr Dawson FONG To-sang
Immediate Past President, Federation of Medical Societies
of Hong Kong
Chief of Service and Consultant Neurosurgeon
Department of Neurosurgery
New Territories West Cluster
Hospital Authority
Dr HO Chung-ping
Specialist in Nephrology
Council Member, The Hong Kong Medical Association
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 73
Annex B
Dr Barbara LAM Cheung-cheung
Specialist in Paediatrics
Dr Augustine LAM Tsan
Chief of Service, Family Medicine
New Territories East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Dr Raymond LEE Kin-man
Chairman, Committee of General Dentistry
The College of Dental Surgeons of Hong Kong
Honorary Secretary
Hong Kong Dental Association
Dr Paco LEE Wang-yat
Specialist in Family Medicine
St. Paul’s Hospital
Dr Belinda LEUNG Fung-ha
Specialist in Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Dr Sigmund LEUNG Sai-man
President, Hong Kong Dental Association
Dr Donald LI Kwok-tung
Specialist in Family Medicine
Director, Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre
Dr LI Sum-wo
Chairman, The Association of Licentiates of Medical
Council of Hong Kong
Council Member, Hong Kong Doctors Union
Council Member, The Hong Kong Medical Association
74 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Prof LIU Liang
Dean, School of Chinese Medicine
Hong Kong Baptist University
Dr Wendy LO WONG Wan-ching
Specialist in Family Medicine
Dr TSE Hung-hing
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong Medical Association
Dr Gene TSOI Wai-wang
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong College of Family Physicians
Prof George WOO
Dean, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr YEUNG Chiu-fat
President, Hong Kong Doctors Union
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 75
Annex B
Task Force on Primary Care Delivery Models
Membership List
Convenor Dr Louis SHIH Tai-cho
Specialist in Dermatology & Venereology
Members Prof Cecilia CHAN Lai-wan
Si Yuan Professor in Health and Social Work
Director, Centre on Behavioral Health
Professor, Department of Social Work and Social
Administration
The University of Hong Kong
Ms Elaine CHAN Sau-ho
Vice President, Group & Credit Insurance
Health Services Department
American International Assurance Company (Bermuda)
Limited
Dr CHAN Wai-man
Assistant Director of Health (Family & Elderly Health
Services)
Department of Health
Dr Joseph CHAN Woon-tong
Deputy Medical Superintendent
Head, Department of Women’s Health and Obstetrics
Hong Kong Sanatorium & Hospital
Dr Lincoln CHEE Wang-jin
Chief Executive Officer
Quality Health Care Asia Limited
76 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Dr Raymond CHEN Chung-i
Chief Executive Officer
Hong Kong Baptist Hospital
Mr CHEUNG Tak-hai
Vice-chairperson
Alliance for Patients’ Mutual Help Organizations
Dr CHOI Kin
Specialist in Nephrology
President, The Hong Kong Medical Association
Dr CHU Leung-wing
Consultant & Chief Division of Geriatric Medicine
Queen Mary Hospital and Grantham Hospital
Hospital Authority
Dr Daniel CHU Wai-sing
Chief of Service and Cluster Service Coordinator (Family
Medicine and Primary Healthcare) and
Deputy Cluster Service Director (Community Services)
Hong Kong East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Ms Agnes HO Kam-har
Head of Medical and Group Life
HSBC Insurance (Asia) Limited
Dr Ronnie HUI Ka-wah
Chief Finance Officer and Executive Director
Town Health International Holdings Co., Ltd.
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 77
Annex B
Dr Andrew IP Kit-kuen
Specialist in Family Medicine
Immediate Past President of the Hong Kong College of
Family Physicians
Dr LAM Ching-choi
Chief Executive Officer
Haven of Hope Christian Services
Prof Cindy LAM Lo-kuen
Professor and Head
Department of Family Medicine and Primary Care
The University of Hong Kong
Convenor of the Task Force on Primary Care Directory
Dr Augustine LAM Tsan
Chief of Service, Family Medicine
New Territories East Cluster
Hospital Authority
Ms Connie LAU Yin-hing
Chief Executive, Consumer Council
Dr Paco LEE Wang-yat
Specialist in Family Medicine
St. Paul’s Hospital
Dr Sigmund LEUNG Sai-man
President, Hong Kong Dental Association
Dr Donald LI Kwok-tung
Specialist in Family Medicine
Director, Bauhinia Foundation Research Centre
78 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Dr LI Sum-wo
Chairman, The Association of Licentiates of Medical
Council of Hong Kong
Council Member, Hong Kong Doctors Union
Council Member, The Hong Kong Medical Association
Prof LIU Liang
Dean, School of Chinese Medicine
Hong Kong Baptist University
Dr LO Su-vui
Director (Strategy and Planning), Hospital Authority
Dr SIN Ngai-chuen
Senior Manager (Transformation Projects)
Hospital Authority
Dr Joyce TANG Shao-fen
Medical Director
United Christian Nethersole Community Health Service
Dr TSE Hung-hing
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong Medical Association
Dr Gene TSOI Wai-wang
Immediate Past President
The Hong Kong College of Family Physicians
Dr Nelson WONG Chi-kit
Head, Corporate Medical Scheme Service
Dr Vio & Partners
Annex B
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 79
Annex B
Prof Thomas WONG Kwok-shing
Vice President (Management)
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr Marcus WONG Mong-sze
Associate Consultant
Family Medicine and Primary Healthcare
Hong Kong East Cluster, Hospital Authority
Prof George WOO
Dean, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Dr YEUNG Chiu-fat
President, Hong Kong Doctors Union
80 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
1. The World Health Report 2008, Primary Health Care - Now More Than
Ever. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
2. Primary Care: America's Health in a New Era. Institue of Medicine (1996).
Washington DC: National Academy Press; 1996.
3. Department of Health. Primary Care. Department of Health, UK. 23 Oct
2009. Available from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Healthcare/Primarycare/
DH_288
4. Primary health care: Report of the International Conference on Primary
Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6-12 September, 1978, World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 1978.
5. Primary health care, including health system strengthening. 62nd World
Health Assembly. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
6. The European Definition of General Practice/ Family Medicine. WONCA
Europe; 2005.
7. Definition: Primary Care. American Association of Family Physicians;
2010. Available from: http://www.aafp.org/online/en/home/policy/policies/
p/primarycare.html#Parsys0002
8. About primary health care. Health care system. Health Canada; 2006.
Available from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hcs-sss/prim/about-apropos-eng.php
9. Starfield B. Primary care: Balancing health needs, services and technology.
New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.
10. Donaldson LJ, Scally G. Donaldsons' Essential Public Health. 3rd Edition.
Abingdon: Redcliff Publishing Limited; 2009.
11. Hong Kong's Domestic Health Account. Estimates of Domestic Health
Expenditure 1989/90-2006/07. Hong Kong SAR: Food and Health Bureau.
Available from: http://www.fhb.gov.hk/statistics/en/dha.htm
12. Thematic Household Survey Report No. 41. Hong Kong SAR: Census and
Statistics Department; 2009.
13. Leung GM, Wong IOL, Chan WS, Choi S, Lo SV on behalf of the Health
Care Financing Study Group. The ecology of health care in Hong Kong.
Social Science and Medicine 2005;61(3):577-590.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 81
14. A study on the requirements of medical services of elderly citizens in Hong
Kong. Hong Kong SAR: Hong Kong Academy of Medicine; 2009.
15. Saltman RB, Rico A, Boerma W. European Observatory on Health Systems
and Policies Series. Primary care in the driver's seat? Berkshire: Oxford
University Press; 2006.
16. The Harvard Team. Improving Hong Kong's health care system: Why and
for whom? Hong Kong SAR: Health and Welfare Bureau; 1998.
17. Health and Medical Development Advisory Committee. Building a healthy
tomorrow - Discussion paper on the future service delivery model for our
healthcare system. Hong Kong SAR: Health, Welfare and Food Bureau;
2005.
18. Leung GM, Bacon-Shone J, editors. Hong Kong 's health system -
reflections, perspectives and visions. Hong Kong SAR: Hong Kong
University Press; 2006.
19. Census and Statistics Department. Population and Vital Events: Table 002.
Population by Age Group and Sex. Hong Kong SAR: Census and Statistics
Department. 11 February 2010. Available from: http://www.censtatd.gov.hk/
hong_kong_statistics/statistical_tables/index.jsp?charsetID=1&tableID=002
20. Census and Statistics Department. Hong Kong Population Projection 2009-
2039. Hong Kong SAR: Census and Statistics Department; 2010.
21. Data from the Hospital Authority; Hong Kong SAR: Hospital Authority;
2009.
22. Active Ageing: A Policy Framework. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2002.
23. 2008-2013 Action Plan for Global Strategy for Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
24. The Global Burden of Diseases, 2004 Update. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2008.
25. Department of Health. Report on Population Health Survey 2003/04. Hong
Kong SAR: Department of Health; 2005.
26. Thematic Household Survey Report No. 40. Hong Kong SAR: Census and
Statistics Department; 2009.
Reference
82 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
27. Leung GM, Tin KYK, Chan WS. Hong Kong's health spending projections
through 2033. Health Policy 2007;81(1):93-101.
28. Starfield B, Shi LY, Macinko J. Contribution of primary care to health
system and health. Milbank Quarterly 2005;83(3):457-502.
29. Macinko J, Starfield B, Shi LY. The Contribution of Primary Care Systems
to Health Outcomes within Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Countries, 1970 - 1998. Health Services Research
2003;38(3):831-865.
30. Hill A, Griffiths S, Gillam S. Public Health and Primary Care, Partners in
Population Health. New York: Oxford University Press; 2007.
31. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for
patients with chronic disease. The Chronic Care Model Part 2. JAMA
2002;288(15):1909 -1914.
32. Atun R. What are the advantages and disadvantages of restructuring a
health care system to be more focused on primary care services? Health
Evidence Network, World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe.
Copenhagen: World health Organization; 2004.
33. Starfield B. Is primary care essential? Lancet 1994;344(8930):1129-1133.
34. Schwenkglenks M, Preiswerk G, Lehner R, Weber F, Szucs TD. Economic
efficiency of gatekeeping compared with fee for service plans: a Swiss
example. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 2006;60(1):24-
30.
35. Singh D. Policy brief: How can disease management programmes operate
across settings and care providers? Health Evidence Network report.
Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2008.
36. Primary health care reform in Australia. Report to support Australia's first
national primary health care strategy. Barton: Department of Health and
Ageing, Australian Government; 2009.
37. NHS London - Strategic plan. London: NHS London; 2008. Available
from: http://www.london.nhs.uk/publications/corporate-publications/nhslondon-strategic-plan
38. The primary health care strategy. Wellington: Ministry of Health, New
Zealand; 2001.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 83
Reference
39. Rosenthal TC. The Medical Home: Growing Evidence to Support a New
Approach to Primary Care. Journal of the American Board of Family
Medicine 2008;21(5):427-440.
40. Lam TP, Wun YT, Goldberg D, Li KTD, Yip KC, Lam KF. Is there a need
to promote family medicine concept in Hong Kong? Meeting the need for
recognition and treatment of depression as a model. Central Policy Unit.
Hong Kong SAR Government; 2008.
41. Lam CLK, Leung GM, Mercer SW, Fong DYT, Lee A, Lam TP et al.
Choice, determinants, pattern and outcomes of utilisation of primary are
services in Hong Kong - the Role of the Family Doctor. Final Report.
Studies in Health Services. SHS-P-10. Food and Health Bureau, Hong Kong
SAR Government; 2009.
42. Mercer SW, Griffiths SM, Lam CLK, Lee A, Wong WCW, Lam TP et al.
Incentives and barriers to adopting the family doctor model in Hong Kong:
an in-depth qualitative study of the views, knowledge, and attitudes of
patients. Final Report. Studies in Health Services. SHS-P-02. Food and
Health Bureau, Hong Kong SAR Government; 2008.
43. Lo YYC, Lam CLK, Mercer SW, Fong DYT, Lee A, Lam TP et al.
Morbidity and management patterns of community-based primary health
care services in Hong Kong. Final Report. Studies in Health Services.
SHS-P-11. Food and Health Bureau, Hong Kong SAR Government; 2009.
44. Lam CLK, Lo YYC, Mercer SW, Griffiths S. Choice, determinants, patterns
and outcomes of utilisation of primary care services in Hong Kong- the
role of the Family Doctor. Joint Final Report. Studies in Health Services.
SHS-P-02, SHS-P-10, SHS-P-11. Food and Health Bureau, Hong Kong
SAR Government; 2009.
45. Working Party on Primary Health Care. Health for All, the Way Ahead.
Hong Kong: Hong Kong Government; 1990.
46. Lifelong investment in health: Consultation document on health care
reform. Hong Kong SAR: Health and Welfare Bureau; 2000.
47. Food and Health Bureau. 'Your Health Your Life' Healthcare Reform
Consultation Document. Hong Kong SAR: Food and Health Bureau; 2008.
48. Food and Health Bureau. Report on first stage public consultation on
healthcare reform 'Your Health, Your Life'. Hong Kong SAR: Food and
Health Bureau; 2008.
84 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
49. Martin JC, Avant RF, Bowman MA, Bucholtz JR, Dickinson JR, Evans KL
et al. The future of family medicine: a collaborative project of the family
medicine community. Annals of Family Medicine 2004;2(Suppl 1):S3-S32.
50. Hung DY, Rundall TG, Tallia AF, Cohen DJ, Halpin HA, Crabtree BF.
Rethinking prevention in primary care: Applying the chronic care model to
address health risk behaviours. Milbank Quarterly 2007;85(1):69-91.
51. Fisher ES. Building a Medical Neighborhood for the Medical Home. New
England Journal of Medicine 2008;359(12):1202-1205.
52. Zwarenstein M, Goldman J, Reeves S. Interprofessional collaboration:
effects of practice-based interventions on professional practice and
healthcare outcomes. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2009,
Issue 3 Art. No.: CD000072. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001481.pub2.
53. Renders CM, Valk GD, Griffin SJ, Wagner E, van Eijk JT, Assendelft WJJ.
Interventions to improve the management of diabetes mellitus in primary
care, outpatient and community settings. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2000, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD001481. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.
CD001481.
54. Stott DJ, Langhorne P, Knight PV. Multidisciplinary care for elderly people
in the community. Lancet 2008;371(9614):699-700.
55. World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2006: Working
Together for Health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
56. World Health Organization Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean.
A strategy for active, healthy ageing and old age care in the Eastern
Mediterranean Region 2006 - 2015. Cairo: World Health Organization
Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean; 2006.
57. Siu AMH, Chan CCH, Poon PKK, Chui DYY, Chan SCC. Evaluation of the
chronic disease self-management program in a Chinese population. Patient
Education and Counseling 2007;65(1):42-50.
58. Saultz JW, Lochner J. Interpersonal Continuity of Care and Care Outcomes:
A Critical Review. Annals of Family Medicine 2005;3(2):159-166.
59. Haggerty JL, Reid RJ, Freeman GK, Starfield BH, Adair CE, McKendry
R. Continuity of care: a multidisciplinary review. British Medical Jorunal
2003;327(7425):1219-1221.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 85
Reference
60. Gulliford M, Naithani S, Morgan M. What is 'continuity of care'? Journal of
Health Services Research and Policy 2006;11(4):248-250.
61. American Academy of Family Physicians. Definition of continuity of care.
American Academy of Family Physicians; 2010. Available from: http://
www.aafp.org/online/en/home/policy/policies/c/continuityofcaredefinition.
html
62. Buetow SA. Towards a New Understanding of Provider Continuity. Annals
of Family Medicine 2004;2(5):509-511.
63. Hofmarcher MM, Oxley H, Rusticelli E. OECD Health Working Paper No.
30. Improved health system performance through better care co-ordination.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 2007.
64. Healthcare for London: A framework for action. 2nd Edition. London: NHS
London; 2007.
65. Walley J, Lawn JE, Tinker A, de Francisco A, Chopra M, Rudan
I et al. Primary health care: making Alma-Ata a reality. Lancet
2008;372(9642):1001-1007.
66. Leung GM, Lam KS. Diabetic complications and their implications on
health care in Asia. Hong Kong Medical Journal 2000;6(1):61-68.
67. Promoting Health in Hong Kong: A Strategic Framework for Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases. Hong Kong SAR: Department
of Health; 2008.
68. Lopez AD, Mathers CD, Ezzati M, Jamison DT, Murray CJL. Global
Burden of Disease and Risk Factors 2006. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2006.
69. Number of deaths by leading causes of death 2001-2008 (based on ICD10 Classification). Centre for Health Protection. Hong Kong SAR:
Department of Health; 2009. Available from: http://www.chp.gov.hk/data.
asp?lang=en&cat=4&dns_sumID=380&id=27&pid=10&ppid=
70. Janus ED, editor. Hong Kong Cardiovascular Risk Factor Prevalence
Study, 1995-1996. Hong Kong: Department of Clinical Biochemistry, The
University of Hong Kong; 1997.
71. van Weel C, De Maeseneer J, Roberts R. Integration of personal and
community health care. Lancet 2008;372(9642):871-872.
86 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
72. Novotny TE. Preventing chronic disease, everybody's business. In: Nolte
E, McKee M, editors. Caring for people with chronic conditions - A health
system perspective European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies
Series. Berkshire: Open University Press; 2008.
73. Part Three: What works ? The evidence for action. Preventive chronic
disease, a vital investment. World Health Organization and the Public
Health Agency of Canada. Available from: http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_
disease_report/contents/part3.pdf
74. Puska P, Vartiainen E, Laatikainen T, Jousilahti P, Paavola M, editors. The
North Karelia Project: From North Karelia to national action. Helsinki:
National Institute for Health and Welfare; 2008.
75. Kong APS, Yang X, Ko GTC, So WY, Chan WB, Ma RCW et al. Effects of
Treatment Targets on Subsequent Cardiovascular Events in Chinese Patients
With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007;30(4):953-959.
76. Prevention of cardiovascular disease: Pocket guidelines for assessment and
management of cardiovascular risk. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2007.
77. Rose G. Sick individuals and sick populations. International Journal of
Epidemiology 2001;30(3):427-432.
78. Rose G. Strategy of prevention: lessons from cardiovascular disease. British
Medical Journal 1981;282(6279):1847-1851.
79. Boyle R. Coronary heart disease 10 years on: Improving Heart Care.
National Service Framework. Department of Health; 29 April 2007.
Available from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_
digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_074233.pdf
80. Report of Cancer Expert Working Group on Cancer Prevention and
Screening. Hong Kong SAR: Department of Health; 2001. Available from:
http://www.chp.gov.hk/FILES/pdf/grp-cancer-cewg-en-20050121.pdf
81. World Cancer Research Fund/ American Institute for Cancer Research.
Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global
Perspective. Washington DC: American Institute for Cancer Research; 2007.
82. Puska P. Successful prevention of non-communicable diseases: 25 year
experiences with North Karelia Project in Finland. Public Health Medicine
2002;4(1):5-7.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 87
Reference
83. Hu FB, Willett WC. Optimal Diets for Prevention of Coronary Heart
Disease. JAMA 2002;288(20):2569-2578.
84. Tuomilehto J, Lindstrom J, Eriksson JG, Valle TT, Hamalainen H, IlanneParikka P et al. Prevention of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus by Changes in
Lifestyle among Subjects with Impaired Glucose Tolerance. New England
Journal of Medicine 2001;344(18):1343-1350.
85. Maxwell RJ. Quality assessment in health. British Medical Journal
1984;288(6428):1470-1472.
86. Maxwell RJ. Dimensions of quality revisited: from thought to action.
Quality in Health Care 1992;1(3):171-177.
87. Goddard M, Smith P. Equity of access to health care services: theory and
evidence from the UK. Social Science and Medicine 2001;53(9):1149-1162.
88. Whitehead M. The concepts and principles of equity and health.
Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2000.
89. Wyszewianski L. Access to Care: Remembering Old Lessons. Health
Services Research 2002;36(6):1441-1443.
90. Gulliford M, Figueroa-Munoz J, Morgan M, Hughes D, Gibson B, Beech
R et al. What does 'access to health care' mean? Journal of Health Services
Research and Policy 2002;7(3):186-188.
91. Joint Principles of the Patient Centered Medical Home. American Academy
of Family Physicians (AAFP), American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP),
American College of Physicians (ACP), American Osteopathic Association
(AOA); February 2007. Available from: http://www.pcpcc.net/content/jointprinciples-patient-centered-medical-home
92. Frampton S, Guastello S, Brady C, Hale M, Horowitz S, Bennett SS et
al. Patient-centered Care - Improvement Guide. Derby: Planetree Inc.,
Camden: Picker Institute Inc.; 2008. Available from: http://www.planetree.
org/Patient-Centered%20Care%20Improvement%20Guide%2010.10.08.pdf
93. Lau DH. Patient empowerment - a patient centred approach to improve
health. Hong Kong Medical Journal 2002;8(5):372-374.
94. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Patient Centered Care. Cambridge:
Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2010. Available from: http://www.ihi.
org/IHI/Topics/PatientCenteredCare/
88 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
95. Valuing People Now - Person-centred Approaches. London: Department
of Health; 2007. Available from: http://valuingpeople.gov.uk/dynamic/
valuingpeople135.jsp
96. The Patient Centered Medical Home: History, seven core features, evidence
and transformational change. Washington DC: The Robert Graham Center;
2007.
97. What is patient centred healthcare? A review of definitions and principles.
London: International Patient Organisation Alliance; 2007. Available from:
http://www.patientsorganizations.org/pchreview
98. World Health Organization. People-centred Healthcare: A Policy
Framework. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007.
99. Stewart M. Towards a global definition of patient centred care. British
Medical Jorunal 2001;322(7284):444-445.
100. Reid RJ, Fishman PA, Yu O, Ross TR, Tufano JT, Soman MP et al.
Patient-Centered Medical Home Demonstration: A prospective, quasiexperimental, before and after evaluation. American Journal of Managed
Care 2009;15(9):e71-e87.
101. Health Promotion Glossary. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1998.
102. Wallerstein N. What is the evidence on effectiveness of empowerment to
improve health? Health Evidence Network. Copenhagen: World Health
Organization Regional Office for Europe; 2006.
103. Aujoulat I, d'Hoore W, Deccache A. Patient empowerment in theory and
practice: Polysemy or cacophony? Patient Education and Counseling
2007;66(1):13-20.
104. Coleman MT, Newton KS. Supporting self-management in patients with
chronic illness. American Family Physician 2005;75(8):1503-1510.
105. Rogers A, Kennedy A, Bower P, Gardner C, Gately C, Lee V et al. The
United Kingdom Expert Patients Programme: results and implications
from a national evaluation. Medical Journal of Australia 2008;189(10
Suppl):S21-S24.
106. Gibson PG, Powell H, Wilson A, Abramson MJ, Haywood P, Bauman A et
al. Self-management education and regular practitioner review for adults
with asthma. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002; Issue 3. Art.
No.: CD001117. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001117.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 89
Reference
107. Bodenheimer T, Lorig K, Holman H, Grumbach K. Patient Self-management
of Chronic Disease in Primary Care. JAMA 2002;288(19):2469-2475.
108. Preparing a Workforce for the 21st Century: The Challenge of Chronic
Conditions. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2005.
109. Pencheon D, Lawrence D, Dixon A, Griffiths S, Jewell T, Hope T et al. Part
5: Developing health system strategy. In: Pencheon D, Guest C, Melzer
D, Gray JAM, editors. Oxford Handbook of Public Health Practice 2nd
Eidtion. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 374-420.
110. Chaudhry B, Wang J, Wu S, Maglione M, Mojica W, Roth E et al.
Systematic Review: Impact of Health Information Technology on quality,
efficiency, and costs of medical care. Annals of Internal Medicine
2006;144(10):742-752.
111. Blumenthal D, Glaser JP. Information Technology Comes to Medicine. New
England Journal of Medicine 2007;356(24):2527-2534.
112. Chen C, Garrido T, Chock D, Okawa G, Liang L. The Kaiser Permanente
Electronic Health Record: Transforming and streamlining modalities of
care. Health Affairs 2009;28(2):323-333.
113. Garg AX, Adhikari NKJ, McDonald H, Rosas-Arellano MP, Devereaux PJ,
Beyene J et al. Effects of Computerized Clinical Decision Support Systems
on Practitioner Performance and Patient Outcomes: A Systematic Review.
JAMA 2005;293(10):1223-1238.
114. Ko GT, So WY, Tong PC, Le Coguiec F, Kerr D, Lyubomirsky G et al.
From design to implementation - The Joint Asia Diabetes Evaluation
(JADE) program: A descriptive report of an electronic web-based diabetes
management program. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making
2010;10(1):26.
115. Sullivan F, Wyatt J. ABC of Health Informatics. BMJ Books. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing; 2006.
116. Detmer D. Improving health and health care through informatics. In:
Pencheon D, Guest C, Melzer D, Gray JAM, editors. Oxford Handbook of
Public Health Practice 2nd Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2006.
p. 466-469.
117. Daaleman TP, Elder GH. Family Medicine and the Life Course Paradigm.
Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine 2007;20(1):85-92.
90 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
118. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence On The Chronic
Care Model In The New Millennium. Health Affairs 2009;28(1):75-85.
119. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Davis C, Hindmarsh M, Schaefer J, Bonomi A.
Improving Chronic Illness Care: Translating Evidence Into Action. Health
Affairs 2001;20(6):64-78.
120. Grimshaw JM, Thomas RE, MacLennan G, Fraser C, Ramsay CR, Vale
L et al. Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline dissemination and
implementation strategies. Health Technology Assessment 2004; 8(6):
Available from: http://www.hta.ac.uk/execsumm/summ806.htm
121. Grol R. Improving the Quality of Medical Care: Building Bridges
Among Professional Pride, Payer Profit, and Patient Satisfaction. JAMA
2001;286(20):2578-2585.
122. Prior M, Guerin M, Grimmer-Somers K. The effectiveness of clinical
guideline implementation strategies - a synthesis of systematic review
findings. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 2008;14(5):888-897.
123. Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, Muntner P, Whelton PK, He
J. Global burden of hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet
2005;365(9455):217-223.
124. Global Health Risks - Mortality and burden of diseases attributable to
selected major risks. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
125. Hart JT. Rule of halves: implications of increasing diagnosis and reducing
dropout for future workload and prescribing costs in primary care. British
Journal of General Practice 1992;42(356):116-119.
126. Ezzati M, Lopez AD, Rodgers A, Vander Hoorn S, Murray CJL. Selected
major risk factors and global and regional burden of disease. Lancet
2002;360(9343):1347-1360.
127. Canadian Heart Health Strategy and Action Plan. Public Health Agency of
Canada; 2009. Available from: http://www.chhs.ca/
128. International Diabetes Federation. Activity Report 2006/2009. Brussels:
International Diabetes Federation; 2009.
129. Diabetes programme. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009. Available
from: http://www.who.int/diabetes/en/
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 91
Reference
130. National Service Frameworks for Coronary Heart Disease. NHS. Department
of Health, UK; 2010. Available from: http://webarchive.nationalarchives.
gov.uk/+/www.dh.gov.uk/en/Healthcare/Longtermconditions/Vascular/
Coronaryheartdisease/Nationalserviceframework/index.htm
131. Diabetes Action Now –an initiative of the World Health Organization and
International Diabetes Federation. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2004.
132. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7).
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Bethesda: NHLBI Health
Information Center; 2004.
133. NICE Clinical Guidelines. London: National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence; 2010. Available from: http://www.nice.org.uk/
Guidance/CG
134. Disease Prevention and Control Guidelines. Ottawa: Public Health Agency
of Canada; 2010. Available from: http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/dpg-eng.php
135. Clinical Resources: Guidelines. The Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners. Melborne: RACGP; 2010. Available from: http://www.racgp.
org.au/guidelines
136. Grol R, Grimshaw J. From best evidence to best practice: effective
implementation of change in patients' care. Lancet 2003;362(9391):1225-
1230.
137. Developing NICE clinical guidelines. National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence, NHS; 2010. Available from: http://www.nice.org.uk/
aboutnice/howwework/developingniceclinicalguidelines/developing_nice_
clinical_guidelines.jsp
138. Lugtenberg M, Burgers JS, Westert GP. Effects of evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines on quality of care: a systematic review. Quality and
Safety in Health Care 2009;18(5):385-392.
139. Healthcare for London, Polyclinics. London: NHS London; 2009. Available
from: http://www.healthcareforlondon.nhs.uk/polyclinics/
140. Shah CP, Moloughney BW. A strategic review of the community health
centre program. Community and Health Promotion Branch. Ontario: 
92 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
Ministry of Health and Long-term Care; 2001. Available from: http://www.
health.gov.on.ca/english/public/pub/ministry_reports/chc_stratreview/chc_
review.html
141. Adashi EY, Geiger HJ, Fine MD. Health Care Reform and Primary Care -
The Growing Importance of the Community Health Center. New England
Journal of Medicine 2010;362(22):2047-2050.
142. Pan X, Dib H, Wang X, Zhang H. Service utilization in community health
centers in China: a comparison analysis with local hospitals. BMC Health
Services Research 2006;6(1):93.
143. Russell GM, Dahrouge S, Hogg W, Geneau R, Muldoon L, Tuna M.
Managing Chronic Disease in Ontario Primary Care: The Impact of
Organizational Factors. Annals of Family Medicine 2009;7(4):309-318.
144. Innovative care for chronic conditions: building blocks for action. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2002.
145. Peterson PE. World Health Organization global policy for improvement
of oral health: World Health Assembly 2007. International Dental Journal
2008;58(3):115-121.
146. Oral Health Survey. Hong Kong SAR: Department of Health; 2001.
147. Integrating mental health into primary care: A global perspectives.
World Health Organization/ WONCA joint report. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2009.
148. De Maeseneer JM, van Driel ML, Green LA, van Weel C. The need for
research in primary care. Lancet 2003;362(9392):1314-1319.
149. Iglehart JK. Prioritizing Comparative-Effectiveness Research - IOM
Recommendations. New England Journal of Medicine 2009;361(4):325-
328.
150. Beasley JW, Starfield B, van Weel C, Rosser WW, Haq CL. Global Health
and Primary Care Research. Journal of the American Board of Family
Medicine 2007;20(6):518-526.
151. Nolte E, McKee M. Integration and chronic care: a review. In: Nolte E,
McKee M, editors. Caring for people with chronic conditions –A health
system perspective European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies
Series. Berkshire: Open University Press; 2008. p. 64-91.
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 93
Reference
152. Kwok TCY, Woo J, Lau E, Lee D, Tang C, McGhee S. Community nurse
specialists and prevention of hospital readmissions. Hong Kong Medical
Journal 2007;13(S5):8-12.
153. Leung ACT. Case-management for at-risk elderly patients – A review. Asian
Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics 2006;1(3):150-156.
154. Chan S, Mackenzie A, Ng DTF, Leung JKY. An evaluation of the
implementation of case management in the community psychiatric nursing
service. Journal of Advanced Nursing 2000;31(1):144-156.
155. Kwok T, Lee J, Woo J, Lee DT, Griffith S. A randomized controlled trial of a
community nurse-supported hospital discharge programme in older patients
with chronic heart failure. Journal of Clinical Nursing 2008;17(1):109-117.
156. Light D, Dixon M. Making the NHS more like Kaiser Permanente. British
Medical Journal 2004;328(7442):763-765.
157. Singh D, Ham C. Improving care for people with long-term conditions:
a review of UK and international frameworks. Birmingham: Health
Services and Management Centre and NHS Institute for Innovation and
Improvement; 2006.
158. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving Primary Care for
Patients With Chronic Illness. JAMA 2002;288(14):1775-1779.
159. An NHS and Social Care Model for improving care for people with
long term conditions. Department of Health, UK. Available from:
http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/
PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/Browsable/DH_4965951
160. International Diabetes Federation. Diabetes prevention: population
approach. Available from: http://www.idf.org/population-approach
161. Aboderin I, Kalache A, Ben-Shlomo Y, Lynch JW, Yajnik CS, Kuh D et al.
Life Course Perspectives on Coronary Heart Disease, Stroke and Diabetes:
Key Issues and Implications for Policy and Research. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2001.
162. Ben-Shlomo Y, Kuh D. A life course approach to chronic disease
epidemiology: conceptual models, empirical challenges and interdisciplinary
perspectives. International Journal of Epidemiology 2002;31(2):285-293.
94 Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document
163. Lancaster T, Stead LF. Physician advice for smoking cessation. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD000165. DOI:
10.1002/14651858. CD000165.pub2.
164. Abdullah ASM, Hedley AJ, Chan SSC, Ho WWN, Lam TH. Establishment
and evaluation of a smoking cessation clinic in Hong Kong: a model for the
future service provider. Journal of Public Health 2004;26(3):239-244.
165. Exercise Prescription - Promote Health. Central Health Education Unit.
Hong Kong SAR: Department of Health; 2008. Available from: http://
exerciserx.cheu.gov.hk/
166. Creating a Patient-led NHS: Delivering a NHS Improvement Plan. London:
Department of Health; 2005.
167. Bergeson SC, Dean JD. A Systems Approach to Patient-Centered Care.
JAMA 2006;296(23):2848-2851.
168. World Health Organization. Active Ageing: Towards Age Friendly Primary
Health Care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004.
169. Modernizing the management of health human resources in Canada:
Identifying areas for accelerated change. Report from a National Summit.
Toronto: Health Council of Canada; 2005.
170. Davies HTO, Nutley SM, Mannion R. Organisational culture and quality of
health care. Quality in Health Care 2000;9(2):111-119.
171. World Health Organization. Management of Quality of Care. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2001. Available from: http://www.who.int/
management/quality/en/
172. Woodward CA. Improving provider skills: strategies for assisting health
workers to modify and improve skills: developing quality health care,
a process of change. Geneva: Evidence and Information for Policy,
Department of Organization of Health Services Delivery, World Health
Organization; 2000.
173. Quality and Outcomes Framework. Department of Health, UK. 2010.
Available from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Healthcare/Primarycare/
Primarycarecontracting/QOF/index.htm
174. Doran T, Fullwood C, Kontopantelis E, Reeves D. Effect of financial
incentives on inequalities in the delivery of primary clinical care in
England: analysis of clinical activity indicators for the quality and outcomes
Reference
Primary Care Development in Hong Kong: Strategy Document 95
Reference
framework. Lancet 2008;372(9640):728-736.
175. Duckett S, Daniels S, Kamp M, Stockwell A, Walker G, Ward M. Pay for
performance in Australia: Queensland's new Clinical Practice Improvement
Payment. Journal of Health Services Research and Policy 2008;13(3):174-
177.
176. Durand-Zaleski I, Obrecht O. France. In: Nolte E, Knai C, McKee M,
editors. Managing Chronic Conditions: Experience in Eight Countries.
Copenhagen: European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies; 2008.

The Basic Structural and Functional Unit of Life: The Cell
What distinguishes a living organism from an inanimate object? A living organism conducts self-sustaining biological processes. A cell is the smallest and most basic form of life.

The cell theory incorporates three principles:

Cells are the most basic building units of life. All living things are composed of cells. New cells are made from preexisting cells, which divide in two. Who you are has been determined because of two cells that came together inside your mother’s womb. The two cells containing all of your genetic information (DNA) united to begin making new life. Cells divided and differentiated into other cells with specific roles that led to the formation of the body’s numerous body organs, systems, blood, blood vessels, bone, tissue, and skin. As an adult, you are made up of trillions of cells. Each of your individual cells is a compact and efficient form of life—self-sufficient, yet interdependent upon the other cells within your body to supply its needs.
Independent single-celled organisms must conduct all the basic processes of life. The single-celled organism must take in nutrients (energy capture), excrete wastes, detect and respond to its environment, move, breathe, grow, and reproduce. Even a one-celled organism must be organized to perform these essential processes. All cells are organized from the atomic level to all its larger forms. Oxygen and hydrogen atoms combine to make the molecule water (H2O). Molecules bond together to make bigger macromolecules. The carbon atom is often referred to as the backbone of life because it can readily bond with four other elements to form long chains and more complex macromolecules. Four macromolecules—carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids—make up all of the structural and functional units of cells.
Although we defined the cell as the “most basic” unit of life, it is structurally and functionally complex (Figure  2.2.1 ). A cell can be thought of as a mini-organism consisting of tiny organs called organelles. The organelles are structural and functional units constructed from several macromolecules bonded together. A typical animal cell contains the following organelles: the nucleus (which houses the genetic material DNA), mitochondria (which generate energy), ribosomes (which produce protein), the endoplasmic reticulum (which is a packaging and transport facility), and the golgi apparatus (which distributes macromolecules). In addition, animal cells contain little digestive pouches, called lysosomes and peroxisomes, which break down macromolecules and destroy foreign invaders. All of the organelles are anchored in the cell’s cytoplasm via a cytoskeleton. The cell’s organelles are isolated from the surrounding environment by a plasma membrane.
fig 2.2.1.png
Figure  2.2.1 : The Cell Structure.
Tissues, Organs, Organ Systems, and Organisms
Unicellular (single-celled) organisms can function independently, but the cells of multicellular organisms are dependent upon each other and are organized into five different levels in order to coordinate their specific functions and carry out all of life’s biological processes (Figure  2.2.2 ).

Cells are the basic structural and functional unit of all life. Examples include red blood cells and nerve cells. There are hundreds of types of cells. All cells in a person contain the same genetic information in DNA. However, each cell only expresses the genetic codes that relate to the cell’s specific structure and function.
Tissues are groups of cells that share a common structure and function and work together. There are four basic types of human tissues: connective, which connects tissues; epithelial, which lines and protects organs; muscle, which contracts for movement and support; and nerve, which responds and reacts to signals in the environment.
Organs are a group of tissues arranged in a specific manner to support a common physiological function. Examples include the brain, liver, and heart.
Organ systems are two or more organs that support a specific physiological function. Examples include the digestive system and central nervous system. There are eleven organ systems in the human body (Table  2.2.1 ).
An organism is the complete living system capable of conducting all of life’s biological processes.
fig 2.2.2.png
Figure  2.2.2 : Organization of Life.
Table  2.2.1 : The Eleven Organ Systems in the Human Body and Their Major Functions.
Organ System	Organ Components	Major Function
Cardiovascular	heart, blood/lymph vessels, blood, lymph	Transport nutrients and waste products
Digestive	mouth, esophagus, stomach, intestines	Digestion and absorption
Endocrine	all glands (thyroid, ovaries, pancreas)	Produce and release hormones
Immune	white blood cells, lymphatic tissue, marrow	Defend against foreign invaders
Integumentary	skin, nails, hair, sweat glands	Protective, body temperature regulation
Muscular	skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle	Body movement
Nervous	brain, spinal cord, nerves	Interprets and responds to stimuli
Reproductive	gonads, genitals	Reproduction and sexual characteristics
Respiratory	lungs, nose, mouth, throat, trachea	Gas exchange
Skeletal	bones, tendons, ligaments, joints	Structure and support
Urinary	kidneys, bladder, ureters	Waste excretion, water balance



The process of digestion begins even before you put food into your mouth. When you feel hungry, your body sends a message to your brain that it is time to eat. Sights and smells influence your body’s preparedness for food. Smelling food sends a message to your brain. Your brain then tells the mouth to get ready, and you start to salivate in preparation for a meal.

Once you have eaten, your digestive system (Figure  2.3.1 ) starts the process that breaks down the components of food into smaller components that can be absorbed and taken into the body. To do this, the digestive system functions on two levels, mechanically to move and mix ingested food and chemically to break down large molecules. The smaller nutrient molecules can then be absorbed and processed by cells throughout the body for energy or used as building blocks for new cells. The digestive system is one of the eleven organ systems of the human body, and it is composed of several hollow tube-shaped organs including the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine (colon), rectum, and anus. It is lined with mucosal tissue that secretes digestive juices (which aid in the breakdown of food) and mucus (which facilitates the propulsion of food through the tract). Smooth muscle tissue surrounds the digestive tract and its contraction produces waves, known as peristalsis, that propel food down the tract. Nutrients, as well as some non-nutrients, are absorbed. Substances such as fiber get left behind and are appropriately excreted.

fig 2.3.1.png
Figure  2.3.1 : Digestion Breakdown of Macronutrients.
Digestion converts components of the food we eat into smaller molecules that can be absorbed into the body and utilized for energy needs or as building blocks for making larger molecules in cells.

everyday connection

fig 2.3.2.png
Figure  2.3.2 : Image by Gabriel Lee / CC BY-NC-SA.
There has been significant talk about pre- and probiotic foods in the mainstream media. The World Health Organization defines probiotics as live bacteria that confer beneficial health effects on their host. They are sometimes called “friendly bacteria.” The most common bacteria labeled as probiotic is lactic acid bacteria (lactobacilli). They are added as live cultures to certain fermented foods such as yogurt. Prebiotics are indigestible foods, primarily soluble fibers, that stimulate the growth of certain strains of bacteria in the large intestine and provide health benefits to the host. A review article in the June 2008 issue of the Journal of Nutrition concludes that there is scientific consensus that probiotics ward off viral-induced diarrhea and reduce the symptoms of lactose intolerance.[1]

Expert nutritionists agree that more health benefits of pre- and probiotics will likely reach scientific consensus. As the fields of pre- and probiotic manufacturing and their clinical study progress, more information on proper dosing and what exact strains of bacteria are potentially “friendly” will become available.

You may be interested in trying some of these foods in your diet. A simple food to try is kefir. Several websites provide good recipes, including www.kefir.net/recipes.htm. Kefir, a dairy product fermented with probiotic bacteria, can make a pleasant tasting milkshake.

fig 2.3.3.png
Figure  2.3.3 : The Human Digestive System. Original figure by LadyofHats (Public Domain) with labels added by Allison Calabrese / CC BY 4.0.
From the Mouth to the Stomach
There are four steps in the digestion process (Figure  2.3.3 ). The first step is ingestion, which is the intake of food into the digestive tract. It may seem a simple process, but ingestion involves smelling food, thinking about food, and the involuntary release of saliva in the mouth to prepare for food entry. In the mouth, where the second step of digestion starts, the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food begins. The chemical breakdown of food involves enzymes, such as salivary amylase that starts the breakdown of large starch molecules into smaller components.

Mechanical breakdown starts with mastication (chewing) in the mouth. Teeth crush and grind large food particles, while saliva provides lubrication and enables food movement downward. The slippery mass of partially broken-down food is called a bolus, which moves down the digestive tract as you swallow. Swallowing may seem voluntary at first because it requires conscious effort to push the food with the tongue back toward the throat, but after this, swallowing proceeds involuntarily, meaning it cannot be stopped once it begins. As you swallow, the bolus is pushed from the mouth through the pharynx and into a muscular tube called the esophagus. As the bolus travels through the pharynx, a small flap called the epiglottis closes to prevent choking by keeping food from going into the trachea. Peristaltic contractions also known as peristalsis in the esophagus propel the food bolus down to the stomach (Figure  2.3.4 ). At the junction between the esophagus and stomach there is a sphincter muscle that remains closed until the food bolus approaches. The pressure of the food bolus stimulates the lower esophageal sphincter to relax and open and food then moves from the esophagus into the stomach. The mechanical breakdown of food is accentuated by the muscular contractions of the stomach and small intestine that mash, mix, slosh, and propel food down the alimentary canal. Solid food takes between four and eight seconds to travel down the esophagus, and liquids take about one second.

fig 2.3.4.png
Figure  2.3.4 : Peristalsis in the Esophagus.
From the Stomach to the Small Intestine
When food enters the stomach, a highly muscular organ, powerful peristaltic contractions help mash, pulverize, and churn food into chyme. Chyme is a semiliquid mass of partially digested food that also contains gastric juices secreted by cells in the stomach. These gastric juices contain hydrochloric acid and the enzyme pepsin, that chemically start breakdown of the protein components of food.

The length of time food spends in the stomach varies by the macronutrient composition of the meal. A high-fat or high-protein meal takes longer to break down than one rich in carbohydrates. It usually takes a few hours after a meal to empty the stomach contents completely into the small intestine.

The small intestine is divided into three structural parts: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. Once the chyme enters the duodenum (the first segment of the small intestine), the pancreas and gallbladder are stimulated and release juices that aid in digestion. The pancreas secretes up to 1.5 liters (.4 US gallons) of pancreatic juice through a duct into the duodenum per day. This fluid consists mostly of water, but it also contains bicarbonate ions that neutralize the acidity of the stomach-derived chyme and enzymes that further break down proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. The gallbladder secretes a much smaller amount of a fluid called bile that helps to digest fats. Bile passes through a duct that joins the pancreatic ducts and is released into the duodenum. Bile is made in the liver and stored in the gall bladder. Bile’s components act like detergents by surrounding fats similar to the way dish soap removes grease from a frying pan. This allows for the movement of fats in the watery environment of the small intestine. Two different types of muscular contractions, called peristalsis and segmentation, control the movement and mixing of the food in various stages of digestion through the small intestine.

Similar to what occurs in the esophagus and stomach, peristalsis is circular waves of smooth muscle contraction that propel food forward. Segmentation from circular muscle contraction slows movement in the small intestine by forming temporary “sausage link” type of segments that allows chyme to slosh food back and forth in both directions to promote mixing of the chyme and enhance absorption of nutrients (Figure  2.3.5 ). Almost all the components of food are completely broken down to their simplest units within the first 25 centimeters of the small intestine. Instead of proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids, the chyme now consists of amino acids, monosaccharides, and emulsified components of triglycerides.

fig 2.3.5.png
Figure  2.3.5 : Segmentation. “Segmentation” by OpenStax College / CC BY 3.0.
The third step of digestion (nutrient absorption) takes place mainly in the remaining length of the small intestine, or ileum (> 5 meters). The way the small intestine is structured gives it a huge surface area to maximize nutrient absorption. The surface area is increased by folds, villi, and microvilli. Digested nutrients are absorbed into either capillaries or lymphatic vessels contained within each microvillus.

The small intestine is perfectly structured for maximizing nutrient absorption. Its surface area is greater than 200 square meters, which is about the size of a tennis court. The large surface area is due to the multiple levels of folding. The internal tissue of the small intestine is covered in villi, which are tiny finger-like projections that are covered with even smaller projections, called microvilli (Figure  2.3.6 ). The digested nutrients pass through the absorptive cells of the intestine via diffusion or special transport proteins. Amino acids, short fatty acids, and monosaccharides (sugars) are transported from the intestinal cells into capillaries, but the larger fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins, and other lipids are transported first through lymphatic vessels, which soon meet up with blood vessels.

fig 2.3.6.png
Figure  2.3.6 : Structure of the Small Intestine.
From the Small Intestine to the Large Intestine
The process of digestion is fairly efficient. Any food that is still incompletely broken down (usually less than ten percent of food consumed) and the food’s indigestible fiber content move from the small intestine to the large intestine (colon) through a connecting valve. A main task of the large intestine is to absorb much of the remaining water. Remember, water is present not only in solid foods and beverages, but also the stomach releases a few hundred milliliters of gastric juice, and the pancreas adds approximately 500 milliliters during the digestion of the meal. For the body to conserve water, it is important that excessive water is not lost in fecal matter. In the large intestine, no further chemical or mechanical breakdown of food takes place unless it is accomplished by the bacteria that inhabit this portion of the intestinal tract. The number of bacteria residing in the large intestine is estimated to be greater than 1014, which is more than the total number of cells in the human body (1013). This may seem rather unpleasant, but the great majority of bacteria in the large intestine are harmless and many are even beneficial.

From the Large Intestine to the Anus
After a few hours in the stomach, plus three to six hours in the small intestine, and about sixteen hours in the large intestine, the digestion process enters step four, which is the elimination of indigestible food matter as feces. Feces contain indigestible food components and gut bacteria (almost 50 percent of content). It is stored in the rectum until it is expelled through the anus via defecation.

Nutrients Are Essential for Cell and Organ Function
When the digestive system has broken down food to its nutrient components, the body eagerly awaits delivery. Water soluble nutrients absorbed into the blood travel directly to the liver via a major blood vessel called the portal vein. One of the liver’s primary functions is to regulate metabolic homeostasis. Metabolic homeostasis is achieved when the nutrients consumed and absorbed match the energy required to carry out life’s biological processes. Simply put, nutrient energy intake equals energy output. Whereas glucose and amino acids are directly transported from the small intestine to the liver, lipids are transported to the liver by a more circuitous route involving the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system is a one-way system of vessels that transports lymph, a fluid rich in white blood cells, and lipid soluble substances after a meal containing lipids. The lymphatic system slowly moves its contents through the lymphatic vessels and empties into blood vessels in the upper chest area. Now, the absorbed lipid soluble components are in the blood where they can be distributed throughout the body and utilized by cells (see Figure  2.3.7 ).

fig 2.3.7.png
Figure  2.3.7 : The Absorption of Nutrients.
Maintaining the body’s energy status quo is crucial because when metabolic homeostasis is disturbed by an eating disorder or disease, bodily function suffers. This will be discussed in more depth in the last section of this chapter. The liver is the only organ in the human body that is capable of exporting nutrients for energy production to other tissues. Therefore, when a person is in between meals (fasted state) the liver exports nutrients, and when a person has just eaten (fed state) the liver stores nutrients within itself. Nutrient levels and the hormones that respond to their levels in the blood provide the input so that the liver can distinguish between the fasted and fed states and distribute nutrients appropriately. Although not considered to be an organ, adipose tissue stores fat in the fed state and mobilizes fat components to supply energy to other parts of the body when energy is needed.

All eleven organ systems in the human body require nutrient input to perform their specific biological functions. Overall health and the ability to carry out all of life’s basic processes is fueled by energy-supplying nutrients (carbohydrate, fat, and protein). Without them, organ systems would fail, humans would not reproduce, and the race would disappear. In this section, we will discuss some of the critical nutrients that support specific organ system functions.


Figure  2.4.1 : The Cardiovascular system. “Simplified diagram of the human Circulatory system in anterior view” by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal .
The cardiovascular system is one of the eleven organ systems of the human body. Its main function is to transport nutrients to cells and wastes from cells (Figure  2.4.3 ). This system consists of the heart, blood, and blood vessels. The heart pumps the blood, and the blood is the transportation fluid. The transportation route to all tissues, a highly intricate blood-vessel network, comprises arteries, veins, and capillaries. Nutrients absorbed in the small intestine travel mainly to the liver through the hepatic portal vein. From the liver, nutrients travel upward through the inferior vena cava blood vessel to the heart. The heart forcefully pumps the nutrient-rich blood first to the lungs to pick up some oxygen and then to all other cells in the body. Arteries become smaller and smaller on their way to cells, so that by the time blood reaches a cell, the artery’s diameter is extremely small and the vessel is now called a capillary. The reduced diameter of the blood vessel substantially slows the speed of blood flow. This dramatic reduction in blood flow gives cells time to harvest the nutrients in blood and exchange metabolic wastes.

fig 2.4.2.jpg
Figure  2.4.2 : The Blood Flow in the Cardiovascular System. “Blood Flow Through the Heart” by OpenStax College / CC BY 3.0.
Blood’s Function in the Body and in Metabolism Support
You know you cannot live without blood, and that your heart pumps your blood over a vast network of veins and arteries within your body, carrying oxygen to your cells. However, beyond these basic facts, what do you know about your blood?

Blood transports absorbed nutrients to cells and waste products from cells. It supports cellular metabolism by transporting synthesized macromolecules from one cell type to another and carrying waste products away from cells. Additionally, it transports molecules, such as hormones, allowing for communication between organs. The volume of blood coursing throughout an adult human body is about 5 liters (1.3 US gallons) and accounts for approximately 8 percent of human body weight.

What Makes Up Blood and How Do These Substances Support Blood Function?
Blood is about 78 percent water and 22 percent solids by volume. The liquid part of blood is called plasma and it is mostly water (95 percent), but also contains proteins, ions, glucose, lipids, vitamins, minerals, waste products, gases, enzymes, and hormones. We have learned that the protein albumin is found in high concentrations in the blood. Albumin helps maintain fluid balance between blood and tissues, as well as helping to maintain a constant blood pH. We have also learned that the water component of blood is essential for its actions as a transport vehicle, and that the electrolytes carried in blood help to maintain fluid balance and a constant pH. Furthermore, the high water content of blood helps maintain body temperature, and the constant flow of blood distributes heat throughout the body. Blood is exceptionally good at temperature control, so much so that the many small blood vessels in your nose are capable of warming frigid air to body temperature before it reaches the lungs.

The cellular components of blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Red blood cells are the most numerous of the components. Each drop of blood contains millions of them. Red blood cells are red because they each contain approximately 270 million hemoglobin proteins, which contain the mineral iron, which turns red when bound to oxygen. The most vital duty of red blood cells is to transport oxygen from the lungs to all cells in the body so that cells can utilize oxygen to produce energy via aerobic metabolism. The white blood cells that circulate in blood are part of the immune system, and they survey the entire body looking for foreign invaders to destroy. They make up about 1 percent of blood volume. Platelets are fragments of cells that are always circulating in the blood in case of an emergency. When blood vessels are injured, platelets rush to the site of injury to plug the wound. Blood is under a constant state of renewal and is synthesized from stem cells residing in bone marrow. Red blood cells live for about 120 days, white blood cells live anywhere from eighteen hours to one year, or even longer, and platelets have a lifespan of about ten days.

fig 2.4.3.jpg
Figure  2.4.3 : Cardiovascular Transportation of Nutrients.
The cardiovascular system transports nutrients to all cells and carries wastes out.

Nutrients In
Once absorbed from the small intestine, all nutrients require transport to cells in need of their support. Additionally, molecules manufactured in other cells sometimes require delivery to other organ systems. Blood is the conduit and blood vessels are the highway that support nutrient and molecule transport to all cells. Water-soluble molecules, such as some vitamins, minerals, sugars, and many proteins, move independently in blood. Fat-soluble vitamins, triglycerides, cholesterol, and other lipids are packaged into lipoproteins that allow for transport in the watery milieu of blood. Many proteins, drugs, and hormones are dependent on transport carriers, primarily by the plasma protein albumin. In addition to transporting all of these molecules, blood transfers oxygen taken in by the lungs to all cells in the body. As discussed, the iron-containing hemoglobin molecule in red blood cells serves as the oxygen carrier.

Wastes Out
In the metabolism of macronutrients to energy, cells produce the waste products carbon dioxide and water. As blood travels through smaller and smaller vessels, the rate of blood flow is dramatically reduced, allowing for efficient exchange of nutrients and oxygen for cellular waste products through tiny capillaries. The kidneys remove any excess water from the blood, and blood delivers the carbon dioxide to the lungs where it is exhaled. Also, the liver produces the waste product urea from the breakdown of amino acids and detoxifies many harmful substances, all of which require transport in the blood to the kidneys for excretion.

All for One, One for All
The eleven organ systems in the body completely depend on each other for continued survival as a complex organism. Blood allows for transport of nutrients, wastes, water, and heat, and is also a conduit of communication between organ systems. Blood’s importance to the rest of the body is aptly presented in its role in glucose delivery, especially to the brain. The brain metabolizes, on average, 6 grams of glucose per hour. In order to avert confusion, coma, and death, glucose must be readily available to the brain at all times. To accomplish this task, cells in the pancreas sense glucose levels in the blood. If glucose levels are low, the hormone glucagon is released into the blood and is transported to the liver where it communicates the signal to ramp-up glycogen breakdown and glucose synthesis. The liver does just that, and glucose is released into the blood, which transports it to the brain. Concurrently, blood transports oxygen to support the metabolism of glucose to provide energy in the brain. Healthy blood conducts its duties rapidly, avoiding hypoglycemic coma and death. This is just one example of the body’s survival mechanisms exemplifying life’s mantra “All for one, one for all.”

What Makes Blood Healthy?
Maintaining healthy blood, including its continuous renewal, is essential to support its vast array of vital functions. Blood is healthy when it contains the appropriate amount of water and cellular components and proper concentrations of dissolved substances, such as albumin and electrolytes. As with all other tissues, blood needs macro- and micronutrients to optimally function. In the bone marrow, where blood cells are made, amino acids are required to build the massive amount of hemoglobin packed within every red blood cell, along with all other enzymes and cellular organelles contained in each blood cell. Red blood cells, similar to the brain, use only glucose as fuel, and it must be in constant supply to support red-blood-cell metabolism. As with all other cells, the cells in the blood are surrounded by a plasma membrane, which is composed of mainly lipids. Blood health is also acutely sensitive to deficiencies in some vitamins and minerals more than others.

What Can Blood Tests Tell You About Your Health?
fig 2.4.4.jpg
Figure  2.4.4 : Blood Tests. Blood tests are helpful tools in diagnosing disease and provide much information on overall health. Image by Thirteen of Clubs / CC BY-SA.
Since blood is the conduit of metabolic products and wastes, measuring the components of blood, and particular substances in blood, can reveal not only the health of blood, but also the health of other organ systems. In standard blood tests performed during an annual physical, the typical blood tests conducted can tell your physician about the functioning of a particular organ or about disease risk.

A biomarker is defined as a measurable molecule or trait that is connected with a specific disease or health condition. The concentrations of biomarkers in blood are indicative of disease risk. Some biomarkers are cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, and prostate-specific antigen. The results of a blood test give the concentrations of substances in a person’s blood and display the normal ranges for a certain population group. Many factors, such as physical activity level, diet, alcohol intake, and medicine intake can influence a person’s blood-test levels and cause them to fall outside the normal range, so results of blood tests outside the “normal” range are not always indicative of health problems. The assessment of multiple blood parameters aids in the diagnosis of disease risk and is indicative of overall health status. See Table  2.4.1  for a partial list of substances measured in a typical blood test. This table notes only a few of the things that their levels tell us about health.

Table  2.4.1 : Blood Tests.

Substance Measured	Indicates
Red-blood-cell count	Oxygen-carrying capacity
Hematocrit (red-blood-cell volume)	Anemia risk
White-blood-cell count	Presence of infection
Platelet count	Bleeding disorders, atherosclerosis risk
pH	Metabolic, kidney, respiratory abnormalities
Albumin	Liver, kidney, and Crohn’s disease, dehydration, protein deficiency
Bilirubin	Liver-function abnormality
Oxygen/Carbon Dioxide	Respiratory or metabolic abnormality
Hemoglobin	Oxygen-carrying capacity
Iron	Anemia risk
Magnesium	Magnesium deficiency
Electrolytes (calcium, chloride, magnesium, potassium)	Many illnesses (kidney, metabolic, etc.)
Cholesterol	Cardiovascular disease risk
Triglycerides	Cardiovascular disease risk
Glucose	Diabetes risk
Hormones	Many illnesses (diabetes, reproductive abnormalities)
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Types of Blood Tests.[1]

National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Types of Blood Tests.[1]

Footnotes
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/heal...bdt/types.html. Published January 6, 2012. Accessed September 22,2017.


The human brain (which weighs only about 3 pounds, or 1,300 kilograms) is estimated to contain over one hundred billion neurons. Neurons form the core of the central nervous system, which consists of the brain, spinal cord, and other nerve bundles in the body. The main function of the central nervous system is to sense changes in the external environment and create a reaction to them. For instance, if your finger comes into contact with a thorn on a rose bush, a sensory neuron transmits a signal from your finger up through the spinal cord and into the brain. Another neuron in the brain sends a signal that travels back to the muscles in your hand and stimulates muscles to contract and you jerk your finger away. All of this happens within a tenth of a second. All nerve impulses travel by the movement of charged sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride atoms. Nerves communicate with each other via chemicals built from amino acids called neurotransmitters. Eating adequate protein from a variety of sources will ensure the body gets all of the different amino acids that are important for central nervous system function.

fig 2.5.1.png
Figure  2.5.1 : The Central Nervous System. “Nervous System” by William Crochot / CC BY-SA 4.0.
The brain’s main fuel is glucose and only in extreme starvation will it use anything else. For acute mental alertness and clear thinking, glucose must be systematically delivered to the brain. This does not mean that sucking down a can of sugary soda before your next exam is a good thing. Just as too much glucose is bad for other organs, such as the kidneys and pancreas, it also produces negative effects upon the brain. Excessive glucose levels in the blood can cause a loss of cognitive function, and chronically high blood-glucose levels can damage brain cells. The brain’s cognitive functions include language processing, learning, perceiving, and thinking. Recent scientific studies demonstrate that having continuously high blood-glucose levels substantially elevates the risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease, which is the greatest cause of age-related cognitive decline.

The good news is that much research is directed toward determining the best diets and foods that slow cognitive decline and maximize brain health. A study in the June 2010 issue of the Archives of Neurology reports that people over age 65 who adhered to diets that consisted of higher intakes of nuts, fish, poultry, tomatoes, cruciferous vegetables, fruits, salad dressing, and dark green, and leafy vegetables, as well as a lower intake of high-fat dairy products, red meat, organ meat, and butter, had a much reduced risk for Alzheimer’s disease.[1]

Other scientific studies provide supporting evidence that foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids and/or antioxidants provide the brain with protection against Alzheimer’s disease. One potential “brain food” is the blueberry. The protective effects of blueberries upon the brain are linked to their high content of anthocyanins, which are potent antioxidants and reduce inflammation. A small study published in the April 2010 issue of the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry found that elderly people who consumed blueberry juice every day for twelve weeks had improved learning and memorization skills in comparison to other subjects given a placebo drink.[2]

However, it is important to keep in mind that this was a short-term study. Blueberries also are high in manganese, and high intake of manganese over time is known to have neurotoxic effects. Variety in the diet is perhaps the most important concept in applied nutrition. More clinical trials are evaluating the effects of blueberries and other foods that benefit the brain and preserve its function as we age.

Footnotes
Gu Y, Nieves JW, et al. Food Combination and Alzheimer Disease Risk: A Protective Diet. Arch Neurol. 2010; 67(6), 699–706. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20385883. Accessed September 22, 2017.
Krikorian R, Shidler MD, et al. Blueberry Supplementation Improves Memory in Older Adults. J Agric Food Chem. 2010; 58(7). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20047325. Accessed September 22, 2017.

A typical human cannot survive without breathing for more than 3 minutes, and even if you wanted to hold your breath longer, your autonomic nervous system would take control. This is because cells need to maintain oxidative metabolism for energy production that continuously regenerates adenosine triphosphate (ATP). For oxidative phosphorylation to occur, oxygen is used as a reactant and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. You may be surprised to learn that although oxygen is a critical need for cells, it is actually the accumulation of carbon dioxide that primarily drives your need to breathe. Carbon dioxide is exhaled and oxygen is inhaled through the respiratory system, which includes muscles to move air into and out of the lungs, passageways through which air moves, and microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered by capillaries. The cardiovascular system transports gases from the lungs to tissues throughout the body and vice versa. A variety of diseases can affect the respiratory system, such as asthma, emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer. All of these conditions affect the gas exchange process and result in labored breathing and other difficulties.

The major organs of the respiratory system function primarily to provide oxygen to body tissues for cellular respiration, remove the waste product carbon dioxide, and help to maintain acid-base balance. Portions of the respiratory system are also used for non-vital functions, such as sensing odors, producing speech, and for straining, such as during childbirth or coughing.

fig 2.6.1.jpg
Figure  2.6.1 : Major Respiratory Structures.
The major respiratory structures span the nasal cavity to the diaphragm. Functionally, the respiratory system can be divided into a conducting zone and a respiratory zone. The conducting zone of the respiratory system includes the organs and structures not directly involved in gas exchange (trachea and bronchi). The gas exchange occurs in the respiratory zone.

Conducting Zone
The major functions of the conducting zone are to provide a route for incoming and outgoing air, remove debris and pathogens from the incoming air, and warm and humidify the incoming air. Several structures within the conducting zone perform other functions as well. The epithelium of the nasal passages, for example, is essential to sensing odors, and the bronchial epithelium that lines the lungs can metabolize some airborne carcinogens. The conducting zone includes the nose and its adjacent structures, the pharynx, the larynx, the trachea, and the bronchi.

Respiratory Zone
In contrast to the conducting zone, the respiratory zone includes structures that are directly involved in gas exchange. The respiratory zone begins where the terminal bronchioles join a respiratory bronchiole, the smallest type of bronchiole (Figure  2.6.2 ), which then leads to an alveolar duct, opening into a cluster of alveoli.

fig 2.6.2.jpg
Figure  2.6.2 : Respiratory Zone. Bronchioles lead to alveolar sacs in the respiratory zone, where gas exchange occurs.
Alveoli
An alveolar duct is a tube composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue, which opens into a cluster of alveoli. An alveolus is one of the many small, grape-like sacs that are attached to the alveolar ducts.

An alveolar sac is a cluster of many individual alveoli that are responsible for gas exchange. An alveolus is approximately 200 μm in diameter with elastic walls that allow the alveolus to stretch during air intake, which greatly increases the surface area available for gas exchange. Alveoli are connected to their neighbors by alveolar pores, which help maintain equal air pressure throughout the alveoli and lung.

fig 2.6.3.jpg
Figure  2.6.3 : Location of Respiratory System.
Figure  2.6.3  shows the location of the respiratory structures in the body. Figure B is an enlarged view of the airways, alveoli (air sacs), and capillaries (tiny blood vessels). Figure C is a close-up view of gas exchange between the capillaries and alveoli. CO2 is carbon dioxide, and O2 is oxygen.

A major organ of the respiratory system, each lung houses structures of both the conducting and respiratory zones. The main function of the lungs is to perform the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with air from the atmosphere. To this end, the lungs exchange respiratory gases across a very large epithelial surface area—about 70 square meters—that is highly permeable to gases.

Gross Anatomy of the Lungs
The lungs are pyramid-shaped, paired organs that are connected to the trachea by the right and left bronchi; below the lungs is the diaphragm, a flat, dome-shaped muscle located at the base of the lungs and thoracic cavity.

fig 2.6.4.jpg
Figure  2.6.4 : Basic Anatomy of the Lungs.
Each lung is composed of smaller units called lobes. Fissures separate these lobes from each other. The right lung consists of three lobes: the superior, middle, and inferior lobes. The left lung consists of two lobes: the superior and inferior lobes.

Blood Supply
The major function of the lungs is to perform gas exchange, which requires blood flowing through the lung tissues (the pulmonary circulation). This blood supply contains deoxygenated blood and travels to the lungs where erythrocytes, also known as red blood cells, pick up oxygen to be transported to tissues throughout the body. The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated blood to the lungs. The pulmonary artery branches multiple times as it follows the bronchi, and each branch becomes progressively smaller in diameter down to the tiny capillaries where the alveoli release carbon dioxide from blood into the lungs to be exhaled and take up oxygen from inhaled air to oxygenate the blood. Once the blood is oxygenated, it drains from the alveoli by way of multiple pulmonary veins that exit the lungs to carry oxygen to the rest of the body.



The functions of the endocrine system are intricately connected to the body’s nutrition. This organ system is responsible for regulating appetite, nutrient absorption, nutrient storage, and nutrient usage, in addition to other functions, such as reproduction. The glands in the endocrine system are the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenals, thymus, pineal, pancreas, ovaries, and testes. The glands secrete hormones, which are biological molecules that regulate cellular processes in other target tissues, so they require transportation by the circulatory system. Adequate nutrition is critical for the functioning of all the glands in the endocrine system. A protein deficiency impairs gonadal-hormone release, preventing reproduction.

fig 2.7.1.jpg
Figure  2.7.1 : The Endocrine System.
Athletic teenage girls with very little body fat often do not menstruate. Children who are malnourished usually do not produce enough growth hormone and fail to reach normal height for their age group. Probably the most popularized connection between nutrition and the functions of the endocrine system is that unhealthy dietary patterns are linked to obesity and the development of Type 2 diabetes. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that twenty-six million Americans have Type 2 diabetes as of 2011. This is 8.3 percent of the US population. Counties with the highest incidence of obesity also have the highest incidence of Type 2 diabetes. To see how the rise in obesity in this country is paralleled by the rise in Type 2 diabetes, review this report by the CDC.
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/slides/maps_diabetesobesity_trends.pdf

What is the causal relationship between overnutrition and Type 2 diabetes? The prevailing theory is that the overconsumption of high-fat and high-sugar foods causes changes in muscle, fat, and liver cells that leads to a diminished response from the pancreatic hormone insulin. These cells are called “insulin-resistant.” Insulin is released after a meal and instructs the liver and other tissues to take up glucose and fatty acids that are circulating in the blood. When cells are resistant to insulin they do not take up enough glucose and fatty acids, so glucose and fatty acids remain at high concentrations in the blood. The chronic elevation of glucose and fatty acids in the blood also causes damage to other tissues over time, so that people who have Type 2 diabetes are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, nerve damage, and eye disease.

career connection

Do your part to slow the rising tide of obesity and Type 2 diabetes in this country. On the individual level, improve your own family’s diet; at the local community level, support the development of more nutritious school lunch programs; and at the national level, support your nation’s nutrition goals. Visit the CDC Diabetes Public Health Resource website at https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/. It provides information on education resources, projects, and programs, and spotlights news on diabetes. For helpful information on obesity, visit https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/. The CDC also has workplace web-based resources with the mission of designing work sites that prevent obesity. See https://www.cdc.gov/workplacehealthpromotion/index.html or more details.

The urinary system has roles you may be well aware of: cleansing the blood and ridding the body of wastes probably come to mind. However, there are additional, equally important functions played by the system. Take for example, regulation of pH, a function shared with the lungs and the buffers in the blood. Additionally, the regulation of blood pressure is a role shared with the heart and blood vessels. What about regulating the concentration of solutes in the blood? Did you know that the kidney is important in determining the concentration of red blood cells? Eighty-five percent of the erythropoietin (EPO) produced to stimulate red blood cell production is produced in the kidneys. The kidneys also perform the final synthesis step of vitamin D production, converting calcidiol to calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D.

If the kidneys fail, these functions are compromised or lost altogether, with devastating effects on homeostasis. The affected individual might experience weakness, lethargy, shortness of breath, anemia, widespread edema (swelling), metabolic acidosis, rising potassium levels, heart arrhythmias, and more. Each of these functions is vital to your well-being and survival. The urinary system, controlled by the nervous system, also stores urine until a convenient time for disposal and then provides the anatomical structures to transport this waste liquid to the outside of the body. Failure of nervous control or the anatomical structures leading to a loss of control of urination results in a condition called incontinence.

Characteristics of the urine change, depending on influences such as water intake, exercise, environmental temperature, nutrient intake, and other factors . Some of the characteristics such as color and odor are rough descriptors of your state of hydration. For example, if you exercise or work outside, and sweat a great deal, your urine will turn darker and produce a slight odor, even if you drink plenty of water. Athletes are often advised to consume water until their urine is clear. This is good advice; however, it takes time for the kidneys to process body fluids and store it in the bladder. Another way of looking at this is that the quality of the urine produced is an average over the time it takes to make that urine. Producing clear urine may take only a few minutes if you are drinking a lot of water or several hours if you are working outside and not drinking much.

fig 2.8.1.jpg
Figure  2.8.1 : Urine Color.
Urine volume varies considerably. The normal range is one to two liters per day. The kidneys must produce a minimum urine volume of about 500 mL/day to rid the body of wastes. Output below this level may be caused by severe dehydration or renal disease and is termed oliguria. The virtual absence of urine production is termed anuria. Excessive urine production is polyuria, which may occur in diabetes mellitus when blood glucose levels exceed the filtration capacity of the kidneys and glucose appears in the urine. The osmotic nature of glucose attracts water, leading to increased water loss in the urine.

Urine is a fluid of variable composition that requires specialized structures to remove it from the body safely and efficiently. Blood is filtered, and the filtrate is transformed into urine at a relatively constant rate throughout the day. This processed liquid is stored until a convenient time for excretion. All structures involved in the transport and storage of the urine are large enough to be visible to the naked eye. This transport and storage system not only stores the waste, but it protects the tissues from damage due to the wide range of pH and osmolarity of the urine, prevents infection by foreign organisms, and for the male, provides reproductive functions. The urinary bladder collects urine from both ureters (Figure  2.8.2 ).

fig 2.8.2.png
Figure  2.8.2 : Urinary System Location.
fig 2.8.3.jpg
Figure  2.8.3 : The bladder.
The kidneys lie on either side of the spine in the retroperitoneal space behind the main body cavity that contains the intestines. The kidneys are well protected by muscle, fat, and the lower ribs. They are roughly the size of your fist, and the male kidney is typically a bit larger than the female kidney. The kidneys are well vascularized, receiving about 25 percent of the cardiac output at rest.

fig 2.8.4.jpg
Figure  2.8.4 : The Kidneys.
The kidneys (as viewed from the back of the body) are slightly protected by the ribs and are surrounded by fat for protection (not shown).

The effects of failure of parts of the urinary system may range from inconvenient (incontinence) to fatal (loss of filtration and many other functions). The kidneys catalyze the final reaction in the synthesis of active vitamin D that in turn helps regulate Ca++. The kidney hormone EPO stimulates erythrocyte development and promotes adequate  O2  transport. The kidneys help regulate blood pressure through Na+ and water retention and loss. The kidneys work with the adrenal cortex, lungs, and liver in the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system to regulate blood pressure. They regulate osmolarity of the blood by regulating both solutes and water. Three electrolytes are more closely regulated than others: Na+, Ca++, and K+. The kidneys share pH regulation with the lungs and plasma buffers, so that proteins can preserve their three-dimensional conformation and thus their function.
Bone Structure and Function
Your bones are stronger than reinforced concrete. Bone tissue is a composite of fibrous strands of collagen (a type of protein) that resemble the steel rebar in concrete and a hardened mineralized matrix that contains large amounts of calcium, just like concrete. But this is where the similarities end. Bone outperforms reinforced concrete by several orders of magnitude in compression and tension strength tests. Why? The microarchitecture of bone is complex and built to withstand extreme forces. Moreover, bone is a living tissue that is continuously breaking down and forming new bone to adapt to mechanical stresses.

Why Is the Skeletal System Important?
The human skeleton consists of 206 bones and other connective tissues called ligaments, tendons, and cartilage. Ligaments connect bones to other bones, tendons connect bones to muscles, and cartilage provides bones with more flexibility and acts as a cushion in the joints between bones. The skeleton’s many bones and connective tissues allow for multiple types of movement such as typing and running. The skeleton provides structural support and protection for all the other organ systems in the body. The skull, or cranium, is like a helmet and protects the eyes, ears, and brain. The ribs form a cage that surrounds and protects the lungs and heart. In addition to aiding in movement, protecting organs, and providing structural support, red and white blood cells and platelets are synthesized in bone marrow. Another vital function of bones is that they act as a storage depot for minerals such as calcium, phosphorous, and magnesium. Although bone tissue may look inactive at first glance, at the microscopic level you will find that bones are continuously breaking down and reforming. Bones also contain a complex network of canals, blood vessels, and nerves that allow for nutrient transport and communication with other organ systems.

fig 2.10.1.jpg
Figure  2.10.1 : Human Skeletal Structure. The human skeleton contains 206 bones. It is divided into two main parts, the axial and appendicular. Image by Openstax / CC BY Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/3d4e4991-1e5...1a9ab4143bc2@3.
Bone Anatomy and Structure
To optimize bone health through nutrition, it is important to understand bone anatomy. The skeleton is composed of two main parts, the axial and the appendicular parts. The axial skeleton consists of the skull, vertebral column, and rib cage, and is composed of eighty bones. The appendicular skeleton consists of the shoulder girdle, pelvic girdle, and upper and lower extremities, and is composed of 126 bones. Bones are also categorized by size and shape. There are four types of bone: long bones, short bones, flat bones, and irregular bones. The longest bone in your body is the femur (thigh bone), which extends from your hip to your knee. It is a long bone and functions to support your weight as you stand, walk, or run. Your wrist is composed of eight irregular-shaped bones, which allow for the intricate movements of your hands. Your twelve ribs on each side of your body are curved flat bones that protect your heart and lungs. Thus, the bones’ different sizes and shapes allow for their different functions.

Bones are composed of approximately 65 percent inorganic material known as mineralized matrix. This mineralized matrix consists of mostly crystallized hydroxyapatite. The bone’s hard crystal matrix of bone tissue gives it its rigid structure. The other 35 percent of bone is organic material, most of which is the fibrous protein collagen. The collagen fibers are networked throughout bone tissue and provide it with flexibility and strength. The bones’ inorganic and organic materials are structured into two different tissue types. There is spongy bone, also called trabecular or cancellous bone, and compact bone, also called cortical bone (Figure  2.10.2 ). The two tissue types differ in their microarchitecture and porosity. Trabecular bone is 50 to 90 percent porous and appears as a lattice-like structure under the microscope. It is found at the ends of long bones, in the cores of vertebrae, and in the pelvis. Trabecular bone tissue makes up about 20 percent of the adult skeleton. The more dense cortical bone is about 10 percent porous and it looks like many concentric circles, similar to the rings in a tree trunk, sandwiched together (Figure  2.10.3 ). Cortical bone tissue makes up approximately 80 percent of the adult skeleton. It surrounds all trabecular tissue and is the only bone tissue in the shafts of long bones.

fig 2.10.2.jpg
Figure  2.10.2 : The Arrangement of Bone Tissues. The two basic tissue types of bones are trabecular and cortical. This photo shows normal (left) and degraded (right) trabecular (spongy) bone. Image by Gtirouflet / CC BY-SA 3.0.
fig 2.10.3.png
Figure  2.10.3 : Cortical (Compact) Bone. “Compact Bone with osteons”. Image by Lord of Konrad / CC0
Bone tissue is arranged in an organized manner. A thin membrane, called the periosteum, surrounds the bone. It contains connective tissue with many blood vessels and nerves. Lying below the periosteum is the cortical bone. In some bones, the cortical bone surrounds the less-dense trabecular bone and the bone marrow lies within the trabecular bone, but not all bones contain trabecular tissue or marrow.

Bone Tissues and Cells, Modeling and Remodeling
Bone tissue contains many different cell types that constantly resize and reshape bones throughout growth and adulthood. Bone tissue cells include osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and osteocytes. The osteoprogenitor cells are cells that have not matured yet. Once they are stimulated, some will become osteoblasts, the bone builders, and others will become osteoclasts, the cells that break bone down. Osteocytes are the most abundant cells in bone tissue. Osteocytes are star-shaped cells that are networked throughout the bone via their long cytoplasmic arms that allow for the exchange of nutrients and other factors from bones to the blood and lymph.

Bone Modeling and Remodeling
During infancy, childhood, and adolescence, bones are continuously growing and changing shape through two processes called growth (ossification) and modeling. In fact, in the first year of life, almost 100 percent of the bone tissue in the skeleton is replaced. In the process of modeling, bone tissue is dismantled at one site and built up at a different site. In adulthood, our bones stop growing and modeling, but continue to go through a process of bone remodeling. In the process of remodeling, bone tissue is degraded and built up at the same location. About 10 percent of bone tissue is remodeled each year in adults. Bones adapt their structure to the forces acting upon them, even in adulthood. This phenomenon is called Wolff’s law, which states that bones will develop a structure that is best able to resist the forces acting upon them. This is why exercising, especially when it involves weight-bearing activities, increases bone strength.

The first step in bone remodeling is osteocyte activation. Osteocytes detect changes in mechanical forces, calcium homeostasis, or hormone levels. In the second step, osteoclasts are recruited to the site of the degradation. Osteoclasts are large cells with a highly irregular ruffled membrane. These cells fuse tightly to the bone and secrete hydrogen ions, which acidify the local environment and dissolve the minerals in the bone tissue matrix. This process is called bone resorption and resembles pit excavation. Our bodies excavate pits in our bone tissue because bones act as storehouses for calcium and other minerals. Bones supply these minerals to other body tissues as the demand arises. Bone tissue also remodels when it breaks so that it can repair itself. Moreover, if you decide to train to run a marathon your bones will restructure themselves by remodeling to be better able to sustain the forces of their new function.

After a certain amount of bone is excavated, the osteoclasts begin to die and bone resorption stops. In the third step of bone remodeling, the site is prepared for building. In this stage, sugars and proteins accumulate along the bone’s surface, forming a cement line which acts to form a strong bond between the old bone and the new bone that will be made. These first three steps take approximately two to three weeks to complete. In the last step of bone remodeling, osteoblasts lay down new osteoid tissue that fills up the cavities that were excavated during the resorption process. Osteoid is bone matrix tissue that is composed of proteins such as collagen and is not mineralized yet. To make collagen, vitamin C is required. A symptom of vitamin C deficiency (known as scurvy) is bone pain, which is caused by diminished bone remodeling. After the osteoid tissue is built up, the bone tissue begins to mineralize. The last step of bone remodeling continues for months, and for a much longer time afterward the mineralized bone is continuously packed in a more dense fashion.

Thus, we can say that bone is a living tissue that continually adapts itself to mechanical stress through the process of remodeling. For bone tissue to remodel certain nutrients such as calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, fluoride, vitamin D, and vitamin K are required.

Bone Mineral Density Is an Indicator of Bone Health
Bone mineral density (BMD) is a measurement of the amount of calcified tissue in grams per centimeter squared of bone tissue. BMD can be thought of as the total amount of bone mass in a defined area. When BMD is high, bone strength will be great. Similar to measuring blood pressure to predict the risk of stroke, a BMD measurement can help predict the risk of bone fracture. The most common tool used to measure BMD is called dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). During this procedure, a person lies on their back and a DEXA scanner passes two X-ray beams through their body. The amount of X-ray energy that passes through the bone is measured for both beams. The total amount of the X-ray energy that passes through a person varies depending on their bone thickness. Using this information and a defined area of bone, the amount of calcified tissue in grams per unit area (cm2) is calculated. Most often the DEXA scan focuses on measuring BMD in the hip and the spine. These measurements are then used as indicators of overall bone strength and health. DEXA is the cheapest and most accurate way to measure BMD. It also uses the lowest dose of radiation. Other methods of measuring BMD include quantitative computed tomography (QCT) and radiographic absorptiometry. People at risk for developing bone disease are advised to have a DEXA scan. We will discuss the many risk factors linked to an increased incidence of osteoporosis and the steps a person can take to prevent the disease from developing.


The immune system comprises several types of white blood cells that circulate in the blood and lymph. Their jobs are to seek, recruit, attack, and destroy foreign invaders, such as bacteria and viruses. Other less realized components of the immune system are the skin (which acts as a barricade), mucus (which traps and entangles microorganisms), and even the bacteria in the large intestine (which prevent the colonization of bad bacteria in the gut). Immune system functions are completely dependent on dietary nutrients. In fact, malnutrition is the leading cause of immune-system deficiency worldwide. When immune system functions are inadequate there is a marked increase in the chance of getting an infection. Children in many poor, developing countries have protein- and/or energy-deficient diets that are causative of two different syndromes, kwashiorkor and marasmus. These children often die from infections that their bodies would normally have fought off, but because their protein and/or energy intake is so low, the immune system cannot perform its functions.

Other nutrients, such as iron, zinc, selenium, copper, folate, and vitamins A, B6, C, D, and E, all provide benefits to immune system function. Deficiencies in these nutrients can cause an increased risk for infection and death. Zinc deficiency results in suppression of the immune system’s barrier functions by damaging skin cells; it is also associated with a decrease in the number of circulating white blood cells. A review of several studies in the journal Pediatrics concluded that zinc supplements administered to children under age five for longer than three months significantly reduces the incidence and severity of diarrhea and respiratory illnesses.[1]

Zinc supplementation also has been found to be therapeutically beneficial for the treatment of leprosy, tuberculosis, pneumonia, and the common cold. Equally important to remember is that multiple studies show that it is best to obtain your minerals and vitamins from eating a variety of healthy foods.

Just as undernutrition compromises immune system health, so does overnutrition. People who are obese are at increased risk for developing immune system disorders such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and some cancers. Both the quality and quantity of fat affect immune system function. High intakes of saturated and trans fats negatively affect the immune system, whereas increasing your intake of omega-3 fatty acids, found in salmon and other oily fish, decreases inflammatory responses. High intakes of omega-3 fatty acids are linked to a reduction in the risk of developing certain autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis, and are used as part of a comprehensive treatment for rheumatoid arthritis.

Footnotes
Aggarwal R, Sentz J, Miller MA. Role of Zinc Administration in Prevention of Childhood Diarrhea and Respiratory Illnesses: A Meta-Analysis. Pediatrics. 2007; 119(6), 1120–30. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17545379. Accessed September 22, 2017. ↵

Although the terms overweight and obese are often used interchangeably and considered as gradations of the same thing, they denote different things. The major physical factors contributing to body weight are water weight, muscle tissue mass, bone tissue mass, and fat tissue mass. Overweight refers to having more weight than normal for a particular height and may be the result of water weight, muscle weight, or fat mass. Obese refers specifically to having excess body fat. In most cases people who are overweight also have excessive body fat and therefore body weight is an indicator of obesity in much of the population.

The “ideal” healthy body weight for a particular person is dependent on many things, such as frame size, sex, muscle mass, bone density, age, and height. The perception of the “ideal” body weight is additionally dependent on cultural factors and the mainstream societal advertisement of beauty.

To standardize the “ideal” body weight and relate it to health, scientists have devised mathematical formulas to better define a healthy weight. These mathematically derived measurements are used by health professionals to correlate disease risk with populations of people and at the individual level. A clinician will take two measurements, one of weight and one of fat mass, in order to diagnose obesity. Some measurements of weight and body fat that do not require using technical equipment can easily be calculated and help provide an individual with information on weight, fat mass, and distribution, and their relative risk of some chronic diseases.

fig 2.12.1.jpg
Figure  2.12.1 : Body Composition.
Body Mass Index: How to Measure It and Its Limitations
Body mass index (BMI) is calculated using height and weight measurements and is more predictive of body fatness than weight alone. BMI measurements are used to indicate whether an individual may be underweight (with a BMI less than 18.5), overweight (with a BMI over 25), or obese (with a BMI over 30). High BMI measurements can be warning signs of health hazards ahead, such as cardiovascular disease, Type 2 diabetes, and other chronic diseases. BMI-associated health risks vary by race. Asians face greater health risks for the same BMI than Caucasians, and Caucasians face greater health risks for the same BMI than African Americans.

Calculating BMI
To calculate your BMI, multiply your weight in pounds by 703 (conversion factor for converting to metric units) and then divide the product by your height in inches, squared.

BMI=[weight(lb)×703]÷height(in)2(2.12.1)
or

BMI=[weight(kg)]÷height(m)2(2.12.2)
More Ways to Calculate
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the CDC have automatic BMI calculators on their websites:

www.nhlbisupport.com/bmi/
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/english_bmi_calculator/bmi_calculator.html
To see how your BMI indicates the weight category you are in, see Table  2.12.1  or use a chart of weight and height to figure out your BMI.

Table  2.12.1 : BMI Categories.
Categories	BMI
Underweight	< 18.5
Normal weight	18.5–24.9
Overweight	25–29.9
Obese	> 30.0
Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Accessed November 4, 2012. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov.

BMI Limitations
A BMI is a fairly simple measurement and does not take into account fat mass or fat distribution in the body, both of which are additional predictors of disease risk. Body fat weighs less than muscle mass. Therefore, BMI can sometimes underestimate the amount of body fat in overweight or obese people and overestimate it in more muscular people. For instance, a muscular athlete will have more muscle mass (which is heavier than fat mass) than a sedentary individual of the same height. Based on their BMIs the muscular athlete would be less “ideal” and may be categorized as more overweight or obese than the sedentary individual; however this is an infrequent problem with BMI calculation. Additionally, an older person with osteoporosis (decreased bone mass) will have a lower BMI than an older person of the same height without osteoporosis, even though the person with osteoporosis may have more fat mass. BMI is a useful inexpensive tool to categorize people and is highly correlative with disease risk, but other measurements are needed to diagnose obesity and more accurately assess disease risk.

Body Fat and Its Distribution
Next we’ll discuss how to measure body fat, and why distribution of body fat is also important to consider when determining health.

Measuring Body Fat Content
Water, organs, bone tissue, fat, and muscle tissue make up a person’s weight. Having more fat mass may be indicative of disease risk, but fat mass also varies with sex, age, and physical activity level. Females have more fat mass, which is needed for reproduction and, in part, is a consequence of different levels of hormones. The optimal fat content of a female is between 20 and 30 percent of her total weight and for a male is between 12 and 20 percent. Fat mass can be measured in a variety of ways. The simplest and lowest-cost way is the skin-fold test. A health professional uses a caliper to measure the thickness of skin on the back, arm, and other parts of the body and compares it to standards to assess body fatness. It is a noninvasive and fairly accurate method of measuring fat mass, but similar to BMI, is compared to standards of mostly young to middle-aged adults.

fig 2.12.2.jpg
Figure  2.12.2 : Measuring Skinfold Thickness Using Calipers. Image by Shutterstock. All Rights Reserved.
Other methods of measuring fat mass are more expensive and more technically challenging. They include:

Underwater weighing. This technique requires a chamber full of water big enough for the whole body to fit in. First, a person is weighed outside the chamber and then weighed again while immersed in water. Bone and muscle weigh more than water, but fat does not—therefore a person with a higher muscle and bone mass will weigh more when in water than a person with less bone and muscle mass.
Bioelectric Impedance Analysis (BIA). This device is based on the fact that fat slows down the passage of electricity through the body. When a small amount of electricity is passed through the body, the rate at which it travels is used to determine body composition. These devices are also sold for home use and commonly called body composition scales.
fig 2.12.3.jpg
Figure  2.12.3 : BIA Hand Device. Image by United States Marine Corps / U.S. Public Domain.
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). This can be used to measure bone density. It also can determine fat content via the same method, which directs two low-dose X-ray beams through the body and determines the amount of the energy absorbed from the beams. The amount of energy absorbed is dependent on the body’s content of bone, lean tissue mass, and fat mass. Using standard mathematical formulas, fat content can be accurately estimated.
fig 2.12.4.jpg
Figure  2.12.4 : Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA). “A Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan” by Nick Smith / CC BY-SA 3.0.
Measuring Fat Distribution
Total body-fat mass is one predictor of health; another is how the fat is distributed in the body. You may have heard that fat on the hips is better than fat in the belly—this is true. Fat can be found in different areas in the body and it does not all act the same, meaning it differs physiologically based on location. Fat deposited in the abdominal cavity is called visceral fat and it is a better predictor of disease risk than total fat mass. Visceral fat releases hormones and inflammatory factors that contribute to disease risk. The only tool required for measuring visceral fat is a measuring tape. The measurement (of waist circumference) is taken just above the belly button. Men with a waist circumference greater than 40 inches and women with a waist circumference greater than 35 inches are predicted to face greater health risks.

fig 2.12.5.jpg
Figure  2.12.5 : Fat Distribution.
The waist-to-hip ratio is often considered a better measurement than waist circumference alone in predicting disease risk. To calculate your waist-to-hip ratio, use a measuring tape to measure your waist circumference and then measure your hip circumference at its widest part. Next, divide the waist circumference by the hip circumference to arrive at the waist-to-hip ratio. Observational studies have demonstrated that people with “apple-shaped” bodies, (who carry more weight around the waist) have greater risks for chronic disease than those with “pear-shaped” bodies, (who carry more weight around the hips). A study published in the November 2005 issue of Lancet with more than twenty-seven thousand participants from fifty-two countries concluded that the waist-to-hip ratio is highly correlated with heart attack risk worldwide and is a better predictor of heart attacks than BMI.[1]. Abdominal obesity is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as having a waist-to-hip ratio above 0.90 for males and above 0.85 for females.

Footnotes
Yusuf S, Hawken S, et al. Obesity and the Risk of Myocardial Infarction in 27,000 Participants from 52 Countries: A Case-Control Study. Lancet. 2005; 366(9497), 1640–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16271645 ?dopt=AbstractPlus. Accessed September 22, 2017. ↵



high pressure going growing concetrase ,and can see the this path clearly ,you have to suffer 
patient care  and interactive handle human social relationship ,so you can know how to deal and petient care you main subject(level3)
Objectives

Describe how sociology is and explain what it means to have a sociological imagination

Explain how sociology is similar to and different from other social sciences.

Describe how the field of sociology developed.

Explain how the three main theoretical perspectives in sociology differ in their focus.



Universal Generalizations

Sociology is a science because it uses scientific data to make and draw conclusions.

Sociology has its place among other Social Sciences, Anthropology, Psychology, Social Psychology, Economics, Political Science, and History.



Guiding Questions

 What is sociology and why should it be studied?

 What are the main theories and theorists that make up the field of sociology?

 What is the sociological perspective?

 What does it mean to have a sociological imagination?



Introduction to Sociology
People walking around a crowded subway station are shown here

Sociologists learn about society as a whole while studying one-to-one and group interactions. (Photo courtesy of Robert S. Donovan/flickr)



A dictionary defines sociology as the systematic study of society and social interaction. The word “sociology” is derived from the Latin word socius (companion) and the Greek word logos (study of), meaning “the study of companionship.” While this is a starting point for the discipline, sociology is actually much more complex. It uses many different methods to study a wide range of subject matter and to apply these studies to the real world.

Sociologists study all aspects and levels of society. A society is a group of people whose members interact, reside in a definable area, and share a culture. A culture includes the group’s shared practices, values, and beliefs. One sociologist might analyze video of people from different societies as they carry on everyday conversations to study the rules of polite conversation from different world cultures. Another sociologist might interview a representative sample of people to see how texting has changed the way they communicate. Yet another sociologist might study how migration determined the way in which language spread and changed over time. A fourth sociologist might be part of a team developing signs to warn people living thousands of years in the future, and speaking many different languages, to stay away from still-dangerous nuclear waste.

Sociology is a relatively new discipline in comparison to chemistry, math, biology, philosophy and other disciplines that trace back thousands of years. Sociology began as an intellectual/philosophical effort by a French man named Auguste Comte (born 1798 and died 1857). He is considered the founder of sociology and coined "Sociology."

The field of sociology focuses on human social behavior from a group perspective. Students learn about the development of sociology and the three major theoretical perspectives that form the basis of the field today. 

Why did thinkers of the day find a need for a new science of sociology? Societies had change in unprecedented ways and had formed a new collection of social complexities that the world had never witnessed before. Western Europe was transformed by the Industrial Revolution, a technological development of knowledge and manufacturing that began in the late 1600s and continued until the early 1900s. The Industrial Revolution transformed society at every level. Look at Table 1 below to see pre and post-Industrial Revolution social patterns and how different they were.

Table 1. Pre-Industrial and Post-Industrial Revolution Social Patterns
Pre-Industrial Revolution	Post-Industrial Revolution
Farm/ Cottage	Factories
Family Work	Breadwinners /Homemakers
Small Towns	Large Cities
Large Families	Small Families
Homogamous Towns	Heterogamous Cities
Lower Standards of Living	Higher Standards of Living
People Died Younger	Peopled died older
© 2014 Ron J. Hammond, Ph.D.

Prior to the Industrial Revolution, families lived on smaller farms and every able member of the family did work to support and sustain the family economy. Towns were small and very similar (homogamy) and families were large (more children=more workers). There was a lower standard of living and because of poor sanitation people died earlier.

After the Industrial Revolution, farm work was replaced by factory work. Men left their homes and became breadwinners earning money to buy many of the goods that used to be made by hand at home (or bartered for by trading one's own homemade goods with another's). Women became the supervisors of homework. Much was still done by families to develop their own home goods while many women and children also went to the factories to work. Cities became larger and more diverse (heterogamy). Families became smaller (less farm work required fewer children). Eventually, standards of living increased and death rates declined.

These pre and post-industrial changes impacted all of Western civilization because the Industrial Revolution hit all of these countries about the same way: Western Europe, United States, Canada, and later Japan and Australia. The Industrial Revolution brought some rather severe social conditions which included: deplorable city living conditions; crowding; crime; extensive poverty; inadequate water and sewage; early death, frequent accidents, and high illness rates. The new social problems required a new science that was unique from any scientific disciplines of the day. Comte wanted a strong scientific basis for sociology, but because of various distractions he never quite established it. After the Industrial Revolution, farm work was replaced by factory work. Men left their homes and became breadwinners earning money to buy many of the goods that used to be made by hand at home (or bartered for by trading one's own homemade goods with another's). Women became the supervisors of homework. Much was still done by families to develop their own home goods while many women and children also went to the factories to work. Cities became larger and more diverse (heterogamy). Families became smaller (less farm work required fewer children). Eventually, standards of living increased and death rates declined.

http://freesociologybooks.com/Introduction_To_Sociology/01_History_and_Introduction.php 

What Are Society and Culture?
Sociologists study all aspects and levels of society. A society is a group of people whose members interact, reside in a definable area, and share a culture. A culture includes the group’s shared practices, values, and beliefs. One sociologist might analyze video of people from different societies as they carry on everyday conversations to study the rules of polite conversation from different world cultures. Another sociologist might interview a representative sample of people to see how texting has changed the way they communicate. Yet another sociologist might study how migration determined the way in which language spread and changed over time. A fourth sociologist might be part of a team developing signs to warn people living thousands of years in the future, and speaking many different languages, to stay away from still-dangerous nuclear waste.

The Sociological Imagination
Sociology differs from other social sciences in the way it examines all aspects of the social world, from relationships between individuals, to groups, organizations, and large institutions like the family, religion, the economy, nation states, education, science, sports, the arts, and all other aspects of social life.  In doing this, it seeks to promote what C. Wright Mills called “the sociological imagination.” http://www.asanet.org/introtosociology/TeacherResources/IMForUnitI.html  

Although these studies and the methods of carrying them out are different, the sociologists involved in them all have something in common. Each of them looks at society using what pioneer sociologist C. Wright Mills called the sociological imagination, sometimes also referred to as the sociological lens or sociological perspective. Mills defined sociological imagination as how individuals understand their own and others’ pasts in relation to history and social structure (1959).

By looking at individuals and societies and how they interact through this lens, sociologists are able to examine what influences behavior, attitudes, and culture. By applying systematic and scientific methods to this process, they try to do so without letting their own biases and pre-conceived ideas influence their conclusions. 

http://cnx.org/contents/afe4332a-c97f-4fc4-be27-4e4d384a32d8@7.21:3/What-Is-Sociology  



Most Americans probably agree that we enjoy a great amount of freedom. And yet perhaps we have less freedom than we think, because many of our choices are influenced by our society in ways we do not even realize. Perhaps we are not as distinctively individualistic as we believe we are.

Yes, Americans have freedom, but our freedom to think and act is constrained at least to some degree by society’s standards and expectations and by the many aspects of our social backgrounds. This is true for the kinds of important beliefs and behaviors just discussed, and it is also true for less important examples. For instance, think back to the last class you attended. How many of the women wore evening gowns? How many of the men wore skirts? Students are “allowed” to dress any way they want in most colleges and universities, but notice how few students, if any, dress in the way just mentioned. They do not dress that way because of the strange looks and even negative reactions they would receive.

Think back to the last time you rode in an elevator. Why did you not face the back? Why did you not sit on the floor? Why did you not start singing? Children can do these things and “get away with it,” because they look cute doing so, but adults risk looking odd. Because of that, even though we are “allowed” to act strangely in an elevator, we do not.

The basic point is that society shapes our attitudes and behavior even if it does not determine them altogether. We still have freedom, but that freedom is limited by society’s expectations. Moreover, our views and behavior depend to some degree on our social location in society—our gender, race, social class, religion, and so forth. Thus society as a whole and our own social backgrounds affect our attitudes and behaviors. Our social backgrounds also affect one other important part of our lives, and that is ourlife chances—our chances (whether we have a good chance or little chance) of being healthy, wealthy, and well educated and, more generally, of living a good, happy life.

The influence of our social environment in all of these respects is the fundamental understanding that sociology—the scientific study of social behavior and social institutions—aims to present. At the heart of sociology is the sociological perspective, the view that our social backgrounds influence our attitudes, behavior, and life chances. In this regard, we are not just individuals but rather social beingsdeeply enmeshed in society. Although we all differ from one another in many respects, we share with many other people basic aspects of our social backgrounds, perhaps especially gender, race and ethnicity, and social class. These shared qualities make us more similar to each other than we would otherwise be.

Does society totally determine our beliefs, behavior, and life chances? No. Individual differences still matter, and disciplines such as psychology are certainly needed for the most complete understanding of human action and beliefs. But if individual differences matter, so do society and the social backgrounds from which we come. Even the most individual attitudes and behaviors, such as the voting decisions discussed earlier, are influenced to some degree by our social backgrounds and, more generally, by the society to which we belong.

 http://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/sociology-comprehensive-edition/s04-01-the-sociological-perspective.html  



Studying Patterns: How Sociologists View Society
All sociologists are interested in the experiences of individuals and how those experiences are shaped by interactions with social groups and society as a whole. To a sociologist, the personal decisions an individual makes do not exist in a vacuum. Cultural patterns and social forces put pressure on people to select one choice over another. Sociologists try to identify these general patterns by examining the behavior of large groups of people living in the same society and experiencing the same societal pressures.

The recent turmoil in the U.S. housing market and the high rate of foreclosures offer an example of how a sociologist might explore social patterns. Owning a home has long been considered an essential part of the American Dream. People often work for years to save for a down payment on what will be the largest investment they ever make. The monthly mortgage is often a person’s largest budget item. Missing one or more mortgage payments can result in serious consequences. The lender may foreclose on the mortgage and repossess the property. People may lose their homes and may not be able to borrow money in the future. Walking away from the responsibility to pay debts is not a choice most people make easily.

About three million homes were repossessed in the United States between 2006 and 2011. Experts predict the number could double by 2013 (Levy and Gop 2011). This is a much higher rate than the historical average. What social factors are contributing to this situation, and where might sociologists find patterns? Do Americans view debt, including mortgages, differently than in the past? What role do unemployment rates play? Might a shift in class structure be an influential factor? What about the way major economic players operate?

To answer these questions, sociologists will look beyond individual foreclosures at national trends. They will see that in recent years unemployment has been at record highs. They will observe that many lenders approved subprime mortgages with adjustable rates that started low and ballooned. They may look into whether unemployment and lending practices were different for members of different social classes, races, or genders. By analyzing the impact of these external conditions on individuals’ choices, sociologists can better explain why people make the decisions they do.

 

A house with a foreclosure sign in front of it.

Risky bank loans, falling housing prices, and high unemployment can result in higher foreclosure rates. (Photo courtesy of Jeff Turner/flickr)

http://cnx.org/contents/afe4332a-c97f-4fc4-be27-4e4d384a32d8@7.21:3/What-Is-Sociology  



Section summary

Sociology is a social science that looks at human society. Viewing the world from a sociological perspective enables sociologists to see beyond commonly held beliefs to the hidden meanings behind human actions. Social upheaval in Europe during the late 1700s and 1800s encouraged scholars to closely study society. Their work led to the development of the academic discipline of sociology.  Sociology employs three major theoretical perspectives—functionalism, which focuses on order and stability; conflict, which focuses on power relations; and interactionism, which focuses on how individuals interact with one another in everyday life. Sociologists use several approaches to conduct research. Regardless of the approaches they use, all sociologists follow a seven-step process.

http://study.com/academy/lesson/what-is-sociology-definition-themes-careers-in-sociology.html
Objectives

Describe how the field of sociology developed as a distinct area of study.

Explain how the three main theoretical perspectives in sociology differ.



Universal Generalizations

The nature of social life and human interaction has been of interest to scholars throughout history.

Rapid growth of urban populations created a great deal of social problems.

Sociology emerged in the 1800’s mainly in France, Germany, and England.



Guiding Questions

How does sociology emerge as a field of study?

Describe the major contributions made by the early sociologists.

Explain the three main theoretical perspectives that form the basis of modern sociology.

Core Founders of Sociology
Emile Durkheim (1858-1917) was the first to take a position in a university and because of the scientific journal he edited, L'Anné Sociologique (the sociological year) and his scientific work, he was able to help sociology to become part of higher education's academic culture. He was also French and took the first position at a university as a sociology professor.

Durkheim discussed Social Facts, a phenomena within society that typically exists independent of individual choices and actions. Durkheim approached a subject that most thought of as being exclusively individualistic in nature-suicide. But, he defined suicide from a social fact perspective which helped him to establish the unique wisdom of sociological analysis.

Karl Marx (1818-1883) was an influential person in the development of sociology as a strong academic discipline. He was not a sociologist. He was an economist, philosopher, and revolutionary. Marx was born in Germany and his writings on the class struggles that existed in society wherein the poor masses are exploited by the few wealthy elite still apply today (perhaps even more so than in his day). His philosophy and the timing of his writings helped early sociologists in the development of social theories and scientific approaches.

Another key German founder of sociology was Max Weber (pronounced vey-bur) (1864-1920). He was a very intelligent person who strongly influenced the development of sociology and taught some of the other early sociologists of his day. Weber studied economics and his work gave balance to Karl Marx's extreme ideas. He studied religion and the economy and published a work called, "The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism." He also studied bureaucracies and defined Ideal Type as the abstract description of a social phenomenon by which actual social phenomena may be compared (You'll see an ideal type in Chapter 9 on caste versus class economic systems). Ideal Types are given as hypothetical examples and we can compare current economic systems to them.

Another early sociologist was a British man named Herbert Spencer (1820-1903). Herbert is remembered for his failed ideas about survival of the fittest in society (not the animal kingdom). He is most remembered for the sociology that wasn't. In other words, he believed that survival of the fittest applied to classes within society and that the wealthy aristocrats were the fittest. Whatever the wealthy people did was in effect better for society in the long run. The problem with his philosophy is that it was not supported by scientific inquiry. In fact his complex ideas were interesting, but not a good explanation of social processes and their causes when put to scientific rigors.

Sociology began in France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and then the United States. Sociology waxed and waned in popularity outside of the US over its short history. Today, sociology has become a United States-centered scientific discipline with most sociologists living in the US. There is significant sociological work being done in various countries of the world, but most of the 14,000 members of the American Sociological Association (the world's largest professional sociology organization) live in the US.



The Three Main Sociological Perspectives   

From Mooney, Knox, and Schacht, 2007.     Understanding Social Problems, 5th edition

Theories in sociology provide us with different perspectives with which to view our social world. A perspective is simply a way of looking at the world. A theory is a set of interrelated propositions or principles designed to answer a question or explain a particular phenomenon; it provides us with a perspective. Sociological theories help us to explain and predict the social world in which we live. Sociology includes three major theoretical perspectives: the functionalist perspective, the conflict perspective, and the symbolic interactionist perspective (sometimes called the interactionist perspective, or simply the micro view). Each perspective offers a variety of explanations about the social world and human behavior.

Functionalist Perspective

The functionalist perspective is based largely on the works of Herbert Spencer, Emile Durkheim, Talcott Parsons, and Robert Merton. According to functionalism, society is a system of interconnected parts that work together in harmony to maintain a state of balance and social equilibrium for the whole. For example, each of the social institutions contributes important functions for society: Family provides a context for reproducing, nurturing, and socializing children; education offers a way to transmit a society’s skills, knowledge, and culture to its youth; politics provides a means of governing members of society; economics provides for the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services; and religion provides moral guidance and an outlet for worship of a higher power.

The functionalist perspective emphasizes the interconnectedness of society by focusing on how each part influences and is influenced by other parts. For example, the increase in singleparent and dual-earner families has contributed to the number of children who are failing in school because parents have become less available to supervise their children’s homework. As a result of changes in technology, colleges are offering more technical programs, and many adults are returning to school to learn new skills that are required in the workplace. The increasing number of women in the workforce has contributed to the formulation of policies against sexual harassment and job discrimination.

Functionalists use the terms functional and dysfunctional to describe the effects of social elements on society. Elements of society are functional if they contribute to social stability and dysfunctional if they disrupt social stability. Some aspects of society can be both functional and dysfunctional. For example, crime is dysfunctional in that it is associated with physical violence, loss of property, and fear. But according to Durkheim and other functionalists, crime is also functional for society because it leads to heightened awareness of shared moral bonds and increased social cohesion.

Sociologists have identified two types of functions: manifest and latent (Merton 1968). Manifest functions are consequences that are intended and commonly recognized. Latent functions are consequences that are unintended and often hidden. For example, the manifest function of education is to transmit knowledge and skills to society’s youth. But public elementary schools also serve as babysitters for employed parents, and colleges offer a place for young adults to meet potential mates. The baby-sitting and mate-selection functions are not the intended or commonly recognized functions of education; hence they are latent functions.

Conflict Perspective

The functionalist perspective views society as composed of different parts working together. In contrast, the conflict perspective views society as composed of different groups and interest competing for power and resources. The conflict perspective explains various aspects of our social world by looking at which groups have power and benefit from a particular social arrangement. For example, feminist theory argues that we live in a patriarchal society—a hierarchical system of organization controlled by men. Although there are many varieties of feminist theory, most would hold that feminism “demands that existing economic, political, and social structures be changed” (Weir and Faulkner 2004, p.xii).

The origins of the conflict perspective can be traced to the classic works of Karl Marx. Marx suggested that all societies go through stages of economic development. As societies evolve from agricultural to industrial, concern over meeting survival needs is replaced by concern over making a profit, the hallmark of a capitalist system. Industrialization leads to the development of two classes of people: the bourgeoisie, or the owners of the means of production (e.g., factories, farms, businesses); and the proletariat, or the workers who earn wages.

The division of society into two broad classes of people—the “haves” and the “havenots”— is beneficial to the owners of the means of production. The workers, who may earn only subsistence wages, are denied access to the many resources available to the wealthy owners. According to Marx, the bourgeoisie use their power to control the institutions of society to their advantage. For example, Marx suggested that religion serves as an “opiate of the masses” in that it soothes the distress and suffering associated with the working-class lifestyle and focuses the workers’ attention on spirituality, God, and the afterlife rather than on such worldly concerns as living conditions. In essence, religion diverts the workers so that they concentrate on being rewarded in heaven for living a moral life rather than on questioning their exploitation.

Symbolic Interactionist Perspective

Both the functionalist and the conflict perspectives are concerned with how broad aspects of society, such as institutions and large social groups, influence the social world. This level of sociological analysis is called macro sociology: It looks at the big picture of society and suggests how social problems are affected at the institutional level. 

Micro sociology, another level of sociological analysis, is concerned with the social psychological dynamics of individuals interacting in small groups. Symbolic interactionism reflects the micro-sociological perspective, and was largely influenced by the work of early sociologists and philosophers, such as George Simmel, Charles Cooley, George Herbert Mead, and Erving Goffman. Symbolic interactionism emphasizes that human behavior is influenced by definitions and meanings that are created and maintained through symbolic interaction with others.

Sociologist W.I. Thomas (1966) emphasized the importance of definitions and meanings in social behavior and its consequences. He suggested that humans respond to their definition of a situation rather than to the objective situation itself. Hence Thomas noted that situations that we define as real become real in their consequences.

Social Interactionism also suggests that our identity or sense of self is shaped by social interaction. We develop our self-concept by observing how others interact with us a label us. By observing how others view us, we see a reflection ourselves that Cooley calls the “looking glass self.”  

Sociology emerged as a field of study as a result of the effects of the Industrial Revolution.  European countries such as France, Germany, and England were greatly affected by this revolution.  Leading founders of sociology contributed greatly to study of sociology.  Three theoretical perspectives: functionalist perspective, conflict perspective, and interacionists perspective help to create the basis of what would become modern sociology.

Theory Snapshot

Theoretical perspective	Major assumptions
Functionalism	Social stability is necessary to have a strong society, and adequate socialization and social integration are necessary to achieve social stability. Society’s social institutions perform important functions to help ensure social stability. Slow social change is desirable, but rapid social change threatens social order. Functionalism is a macro theory.
Conflict theory	Society is characterized by pervasive inequality based on social class, gender, and other factors. Far-reaching social change is needed to reduce or eliminate social inequality and to create an egalitarian society. Conflict theory is a macro theory.
Symbolic interactionism	People construct their roles as they interact; they do not merely learn the roles that society has set out for them. As this interaction occurs, individuals negotiate their definitions of the situations in which they find themselves and socially construct the reality of these situations. In so doing, they rely heavily on symbols such as words and gestures to reach a shared understanding of their interaction. Symbolic interactionism is a micro theory.



 remember on your  world you are one the individual tower clock , you have to found the right thing by your selve ,because only this way the  things could belong you , no one can't to toke away from you . even your treasure dissapear on your eyes ,laest we had it , batter than nothings 